The ancient Greeks wrote texts intended for education. The modern textbook has its roots in the standardization made possible by the printing press. Johannes Gutenberg himself may have printed editions of Ars Minor, a schoolbook on Latin grammar by Aelius Donatus. Early textbooks were used by tutors and teachers, who used the books as instructional aids (e.g., alphabet books), as well as individuals who taught themselves.

The Greek philosopher Plato lamented the loss of knowledge because the media of transmission were changing. Before the invention of the Greek alphabet , years ago, knowledge and stories were recited aloud, much like Homer's epic poems. The new technology of writing meant stories no longer needed to be memorized, a development Socrates feared would weaken the Greeks' mental capacities for memorizing and retelling. (Ironically, we know about Socrates' concerns only because they were written down by his student Plato in his famous Dialogues.) 

The next revolution for books came with the th-century invention of printing with changeable type. The invention is attributed to German metalsmith Johannes Gutenberg, who cast type in molds using a melted metal alloy and constructed a wooden-screw printing press to transfer the image onto paper.

Gutenberg's first and only large-scale printing effort was the now iconic Gutenberg Bible in the s — a Latin translation from the Hebrew Old Testament and the Greek New Testament, copies of which can be viewed on the British Library website. Gutenberg's invention made mass production of texts possible for the first time. Although the Gutenberg Bible itself was expensive, printed books began to spread widely over European trade routes during the next  years, and by the th century, printed books had become more widely accessible and less costly.

Compulsory education and the subsequent growth of schooling in Europe led to the printing of many standardized texts for children. Textbooks have become the primary teaching instrument for most children since the th century. Two textbooks of historical significance in United States schooling were the th century New England Primer and the th century McGuffey Readers.

Technological advances change the way people interact with textbooks. Online and digital materials are making it increasingly easy for students to access materials other than the traditional print textbook. Students now have access to electronic and PDF books, online tutoring systems and video lectures. An example of an electronically published book, or e-book, is Principles of Biology from Nature Publishing.

Most notably, an increasing number of authors are foregoing commercial publishers and offering their textbooks under a creative commons or other open license.

Market[edit]
The "broken market"[edit]
The textbook market does not operate in the same manner as most consumer markets. First, the end consumers (students) do not select the product, and the product is not purchased by faculty or professors. Therefore, price is removed from the purchasing decision, giving the producer (publishers) disproportionate market power to set prices high.

This fundamental difference in the market is often cited as the primary reason that prices are out of control. The term "broken market" first appeared in the economist James Koch's analysis of the market commissioned by the Advisory Committee on Student Financial Assistance.

This situation is exacerbated by the lack of competition in the textbook market. Consolidation in the past few decades[when?] has reduced the number of major textbook companies from around  to just a handful. Consequently, there is less competition than there used to be, and the high cost of starting up keeps new companies from entering.

New editions and the used book market[edit]
Students seek relief from rising prices through the purchase of used copies of textbooks, which tend to be less expensive. Most college bookstores offer used copies of textbooks at lower prices. Most bookstores will also buy used copies back from students at the end of a term if the book is going to be re-used at the school. Books that are not being re-used at the school are often purchased by an off-campus wholesaler for -% of the new cost, for distribution to other bookstores where the books will be sold. Textbook companies have countered this by encouraging faculty to assign homework that must be done on the publisher's website. If a student has a new textbook, then he or she can use the pass code in the book to register on the site. If the student has purchased a used textbook, then he or she must pay money directly to the publisher in order to access the website and complete assigned homework.

Students who look beyond the campus bookstore can typically find lower prices. With the ISBN or title, author and edition, most textbooks can be located through online used book sellers or retailers.

Most leading textbook companies publish a new edition every  or  years, more frequently in math & science. Harvard economics chair James K. Stock has stated that new editions are often not about significant improvements to the content. "New editions are to a considerable extent simply another tool used by publishers and textbook authors to maintain their revenue stream, that is, to keep up prices,"  A study conducted by The Student PIRGs found that a new edition costs % more than a new copy of previous edition, and % more than a used copy of the previous edition. Textbook publishers maintain these new editions are driven by faculty demand. The Student PIRGs' study found that % of faculty said new editions were justified “half of the time or less” and % said they were justified “rarely” or “never.” The PIRG study has been criticized by publishers, who argue that the report contains factual inaccuracies regarding the annual average cost of textbooks per student.

The Student PIRGs also point out that recent emphasis on electronic textbooks, or "eTextbooks," does not always save students money. Even though the book costs less up-front, the student will not recover any of the cost through resale.

Bundling[edit]
Another publishing industry practice that has been highly criticized is "bundling," or shrink-wrapping supplemental items into a textbook.[citation needed] Supplemental items range from CD-ROMs and workbooks to online passcodes and bonus material. Students do not always have the option to purchase these items separately, and often the one-time-use supplements destroy the resale value of the textbook.

According to the Student PIRGs, the typical bundled textbook is %-% more than an unbundled textbook, and % of professors said they “rarely” or “never” use the bundled items in their courses.

A  Government Accountability Office (GAO) Report found that the production of these supplemental items was the primary cause of rapidly increasing prices:

While publishers, retailers, and wholesalers all play a role in textbook pricing, the primary factor contributing to increases in the price of textbooks has been the increased investment publishers have made in new products to enhance instruction and learning...While wholesalers, retailers, and others do not question the quality of these materials, they have expressed concern that the publishers’ practice of packaging supplements with a textbook to sell as one unit limits the opportunity students have to purchase less expensive used books....If publishers continue to increase these investments, particularly in technology, the cost to produce a textbook is likely to continue to increase in the future.

Bundling has also been used as a means of segmenting the used book market. Each combination of a textbook and supplemental items receives a separate ISBN. A single textbook could therefore have dozens of ISBNs that denote different combinations of supplements packaged with that particular book. When a bookstore attempts to track down used copies of textbooks, they will search for the ISBN the course instructor orders, which will locate only a subset of the copies of the textbook.

Legislation on the state and federal level seeks to limit the practice of bundling, by requiring publishers to offer all components separately. Publishers have testified in favor of bills including this provision, but only in the case that the provision exempts the loosely defined category of "integrated textbooks." The Federal bill only exempts rd party materials in integrated textbooks, however publisher lobbyists have attempted to create a loophole through this definition in state bills.

Price disclosure[edit]
Given that the problem of high textbook prices is linked to the "broken" economics of the market, requiring publishers to disclose textbook prices to faculty is a solution pursued by a number of legislatures. By inserting price into sales interactions, this regulation will supposedly make the economic forces operate more normally.

No data suggests that this is in fact true. However, The Student PIRGs have found that publishers actively withhold pricing information from faculty, making it difficult to obtain. Their most recent study found that % of faculty say publisher sales representatives do not volunteer prices, and only % got an answer when they directly asked. Furthermore, the study found that % of faculty rated publisher websites as “informative and easy to use” and less than half said they typically listed the price.

The US Congress passed a law in the  Higher Education Opportunity Act that would require price disclosure. Legislation requiring price disclosure has passed in Connecticut, Washington, Minnesota, Oregon, Arizona, Oklahoma, and Colorado. Publishers are currently supporting price disclosure mandates, though they insist that the "suggested retail price" should be disclosed, rather than the actual price the publisher would get for the book.

Used textbook market[edit]
Once a textbook is purchased from a retailer for the first time, there are several ways a student can sell his/her textbooks back at the end of the semester or later. Students can sell to ) the college/university bookstore; ) fellow students; ) a number of online websites; or ) a student swap service.

Campus buyback[edit]
As for buyback on a specific campus, faculty decisions largely determine how much a student receives. If a professor chooses to use the same book the following semester, even if it is a custom text, designed specifically for an individual instructor, bookstores often buy the book back. The GAO report found that, generally, if a book is in good condition and will be used on the campus again the next term, bookstores will pay students  percent of the original price paid. If the bookstore has not received a faculty order for the book at the end of the term and the edition is still current, they may offer students the wholesale price of the book, which could range from  to  percent of the new retail price, according to the GAO report.

When students resell their textbooks during campus “buyback” periods, these textbooks are often sold into the national used textbook distribution chain. If a textbook is not going to be used on campus for the next semester of courses then many times the college bookstore will sell that book to a national used book company. The used book company then resells the book to another college bookstore. Finally, that book is sold as used to a student at another college at a price that is typically % of the new book price. At each step, a markup is applied to the book to enable the respective companies to continue to operate.

Student to student sales[edit]
Students can also sell or trade textbooks among themselves. After completing a course, sellers will often seek out members of the next enrolling class, people who are likely to be interested in purchasing the required books. This may be done by posting flyers to advertise the sale of the books or simply soliciting individuals who are shopping in the college bookstore for the same titles. Many larger schools have independent websites set up for the purpose of facilitating such trade. These often operate much like digital classified ads, enabling students to list their items for sale and browse for those they wish to acquire. Also, at the US Air Force Academy, it is possible to e-mail entire specific classes, allowing for an extensive network of textbook sales to exist.

Student online marketplaces[edit]
Online marketplaces are one of the two major types of online websites students can use to sell used textbooks. Online marketplaces may have an online auction format or may allow the student to list their books for a fixed price. In either case, the student must create the listing for each book themselves and wait for a buyer to order, making the use of marketplaces a more passive way of selling used textbooks. Unlike campus buyback and online book, students are unlikely to sell all their books to one buyer using online marketplaces, and will likely have to send out multiple books individually.

Online book buyers[edit]
Online book buyers buy textbooks, and sometimes other types of books, with the aim of reselling them for a profit. Like online marketplaces, online book buyers operate year-round, giving students the opportunity to sell their books even when campus "buyback" periods are not in effect. Students enter the ISBN numbers of the books they wish to sell and receive a price quote or offer. These online book buyers often offer "free shipping" (which in actuality is built into the offer for the book), and allow students to sell multiple books to the same source. Because online book buyers are buying books for resale, the prices they offer may be lower than students can get on online marketplaces. However, their prices are competitive, and they tend to focus on the convenience of their service. Some even claim that buying used textbooks online and selling them to online book buyers has a lower total cost than even textbook rental services.

Textbook exchanges[edit]
In response to escalating textbook prices, limited competition, and to provide a more efficient system to connect buyers and sellers together, online textbook exchanges were developed. Most of today's sites handle buyer and seller payments, and usually deduct a small commission only after the sale is completed.

According to textbook author Henry L. Roediger (and Wadsworth Publishing Company senior editor Vicki Knight), the used textbook market is illegitimate, and entirely to blame for the rising costs of textbooks. As methods of "dealing with this problem", he recommends making previous editions of textbooks obsolete, binding the textbook with other materials, and passing laws to prevent the sale of used books. The concept is not unlike the limited licensing approach for computer software, which places rigid restrictions on resale and reproduction. The intent is to make users understand that the content of any textbook is the intellectual property of the author and/or the publisher, and that as such, subject to copyright. Obviously, this idea is completely opposed to the millennia-old tradition of the sale of used books, and would make that entire industry illegal.

E-textbooks[edit]
Another alternative to save money and obtaining the materials you are required are e-textbooks.The article "E books rewrite the rules of education" states that, alternately to spending a lot of money on textbooks, you can purchase an e-textbook at a small amount of the cost. With the growth of digital applications for iPhone, and gadgets like the Amazon kindle, e-textbooks are not an innovation, but have been "gaining momentum". According to the article " Are textbooks obsolete?", publishers and editorials are concerned about the issue of expensive textbooks. "The expense of textbooks is a concern for students, and e-textbooks, address the face of the issue, Williams says " As publishers we understand the high cost of these materials, and the electronic format permit us diminish the general expense of our content to the market".

Rental programs[edit]
In-store rentals are processed by either using a kiosk and ordering books online with a third party facilitator or renting directly from the store's inventory. Some stores use a hybrid of both methods, opting for in-store selections of the most popular books and the online option for more obscure titles or books they consider too risky to put in the rental system.

Textbook sharing[edit]
Another method to help students save money that is coming up is called Textbooks Sharing. Using textbook sharing the students share the physical textbook with other students, and also the cost of the book is divided among the users of the textbook. So over the life of the textbook, if  students use the textbook, the cost of the textbook for each student will be % of the total cost of the book.

Open textbooks[edit]
Main article: Open textbook
The latest trend in textbooks is "open textbooks." An open textbook is a free, openly licensed textbook offered online by its author(s). According to PIRG, a number of textbooks already exist, and are being used at schools such as MIT and Harvard. A  study published found that open textbooks offer a viable and attractive means to meet faculty and student needs while offering savings of approximately % compared to traditional textbook options.

Although the largest question seems to be who is going to pay to write them, several state policies suggest that public investment in open textbooks might make sense.[citation needed] To offer another perspective[citation needed], any jurisdiction might find itself challenged to find sufficient numbers of credible academics who would be willing to undertake the effort of creating an open textbook without realistic compensation, in order to make such a proposal work.

The other challenge involves the reality of publishing, which is that textbooks with good sales and profitability subsidize the creation and publication of low demand but believed to be necessary textbooks.[citation needed] Subsidies skew markets and the elimination of subsidies is disruptive; in the case of low demand textbooks the possibilities following subsidy removal include any or all of the following: higher retail prices, a switch to open textbooks, a reduction of the number of titles published.

On the other hand, independent open textbook authoring and publishing models are developing. Most notably, the startup publisher Flat World Knowledge already has dozens of college-level open textbooks that are used by more than  institutions in  countries. Their business model was to offer the open textbook free online, and then sell ancillary products that students are likely to buy if prices are reasonable - print copies, study guides, ePub, .Mobi (Kindle), PDF download, etc. Flat World Knowledge compensates its authors with royalties on these sales. With the generated revenue Flat World Knowledge funded high-quality publishing activities with a goal of making the Flat World financial model sustainable. However, in January,  Flat World Knowledge announced their financial model could no longer sustain their free-to-read options for students. Flat World Knowledge intends to have open textbooks available for the  highest-enrolled courses on college campuses within the next few years.

CK- FlexBooks are the open textbooks designed for United States K- courses. CK- FlexBooks are designed to facilitate conformance to national and United States and individual state textbook standards. CK- FlexBooks are licensed under a Creative Commons BY-NC-SA license. CK- FlexBooks are free to use online and offer formats suitable for use on portable personal reading devices and computers - both online and offline. Formats for both iPad and Kindle are offered. School districts may select a title as is or customize the open textbook to meet local instructional standards. The file may be then accessed electronically or printed using any print on demand service without paying a royalty, saving % or more when compared to traditional textbook options. An example print on demand open textbook title, "College Algebra" by Stitz & Zeager through Lulu is  pages, royalty free, and costs about $ ordered one at a time (March, ). (Any print on demand service could be used - this is just an example. School districts could easily negotiate even lower prices for bulk purchases to be printed in their own communities.) Teacher's editions are available for educators and parents. Titles have been authored by various individuals and organizations and are vetted for quality prior to inclusion in the CK- catalog. An effort is underway to map state educational standards correlations. Stanford University provided a number of titles in use.

Curriki is another modular K- content non-profit "empowering educators to deliver and share curricula." Selected Curriki materials are also correlated to U.S. state educational standards. Some Curriki content has been collected into open textbooks and some may be used for modular lessons or special topics.

International market pricing[edit]
Similar to the issue of reimportation of pharmaceuticals into the U.S. market, the GAO report also highlights a similar phenomenon in textbook distribution. Retailers and publishers have expressed concern about the re-importation of lower-priced textbooks from international locations. Specifically, they cited the ability students have to purchase books from online distribution channels outside the United States at lower prices, which may result in a loss of sales for U.S. retailers. Additionally, the availability of lower-priced textbooks through these channels has heightened distrust and frustration among students regarding textbook prices, and college stores find it difficult to explain why their textbook prices are higher, according to the National Association of College Stores. Retailers and publishers have also been concerned that some U.S. retailers may have engaged in reimportation on a large scale by ordering textbooks for entire courses at lower prices from international distribution channels. While the  Supreme Court decision Quality King v. L'anza protects the reimportation of copyrighted materials under the first-sale doctrine, textbook publishers have still attempted to prevent the U.S. sale of international editions by enforcing contracts which forbid foreign wholesalers from selling to American distributors. Concerned about the effects of differential pricing on college stores, the National Association of College Stores has called on publishers to stop the practice of selling textbooks at lower prices outside the United States. For example, some U.S. booksellers arrange for drop-shipments in foreign countries which are then re-shipped to America where the books can be sold online at used prices (for a "new" unopened book). The authors often getting half-royalties instead of full-royalties, minus the charges for returned books from bookstores.

Production[edit]
Cost distribution[edit]
According to the National Association of College Stores, the entire cost of the book is justified by expenses, with typically .% of the price of a new book going to the author's royalties (or a committee of editors at the publishing house), .% going to the store, and .% going to the publisher. The store and publisher amounts are slightly higher for Canada.[citation needed] Bookstores and used-book vendors profit from the resale of textbooks on the used market, with publishers only earning profits on sales of new textbooks.[citation needed]

Research[edit]
According to the GAO study published July :

Following closely behind annual increases in tuition and fees at postsecondary institutions, college textbook and supply prices have risen at twice the rate of annual inflation over the last two decades.

Rising at an average of  percent each year since academic year -, compared with overall average price increases of  percent per year, college textbook and supply prices trailed tuition and fee increases, which averaged  percent per year. Since December , textbook and supply prices have nearly tripled, increasing by  percent, while tuition and fees increased by  percent and overall prices grew by  percent. While increases in textbook and supply prices have followed increases in tuition and fees, the cost of textbooks and supplies for degree-seeking students as a percentage of tuition and fees varies by the type of institution attended. For example, the average estimated cost of books and supplies per first-time, full-time student for academic year - was $ at -year public institutions, or about  percent of the cost of tuition and fees. At -year public institutions, where low-income students are more likely to pursue a degree program and tuition and fees are lower, the average estimated cost of books and supplies per first-time, full-time student was $ in academic year -, representing almost three-quarters of the cost of tuition and fees.

According to the nd edition of a study by the United States Public Interest Research Group (US PIRG) published in February [citation needed]: "Textbook prices are increasing at more than four times the inflation rate for all finished goods, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics Producer Price Index. The wholesale prices charged by textbook publishers have jumped  percent since , while prices charged for all finished goods increased only  percent. Similarly, the prices charged by publishers for general books increased just  percent during the same time period."

According to the  edition of the College Board’s Trend in College Pricing Report published October [citation needed]: "College costs continue to rise and federal student aid has shown slower growth when adjusted for inflation, while textbooks, as a percentage of total college costs, have remained steady at about  percent."

K- textbooks[edit]
In most U.S. K- public schools, a local school board votes on which textbooks to purchase from a selection of books that have been approved by the state Department of Education. Teachers receive the books to give to the students for each subject. Teachers are usually not required to use textbooks, however, and many prefer to use other materials instead.

Textbook publishing in the U.S. is a business primarily aimed at large states. This is due to state purchasing controls over the books, most notably in Texas, where the Texas Education Agency sets curricula for all courses taught by the state's ,+ school districts, and therefore also approves which textbooks can be purchased.

High school[edit]
In recent years, high school textbooks of United States history have come under increasing criticism. Authors such as Howard Zinn (A People's History of the United States), Gilbert T. Sewall (Textbooks: Where the Curriculum Meets the Child) and James W. Loewen (Lies My Teacher Told Me: Everything Your American History Textbook Got Wrong), make the claim that U.S. history textbooks contain mythical untruths and omissions, which paint a whitewashed picture that bears little resemblance to what most students learn in universities. Inaccurately retelling history, through textbooks or other literature, has been practiced in many societies, from ancient Rome to the Soviet Union (USSR) and the People's Republic of China. The content of history textbooks is often determined by the political forces of state adoption boards and ideological pressure groups.[citation needed]

Science textbooks have been the source of ongoing debates and have come under scrutiny from several organizations. The presentation or inclusion of controversial scientific material has been debated in several court cases. Poorly designed textbooks have been cited as contributing to declining grades in mathematics and science in the United States and organizations such as the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (AAAS) have criticized the layout, presentation, and amount of material given in textbooks.

Discussions of textbooks have been included on creation and evolution in the public education debate. The Smith v. Board of School Commissioners of Mobile County case brought forward a debate about scientific fact being presented in textbooks.

In his book, Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman!, the late physics Nobel Prize laureate Richard P. Feynman described his experiences as a member of a committee that evaluated science textbooks. At some instances, there were nonsensical examples to illustrate physical phenomena; then a company sent — for reasons of timing — a textbook that contained blank pages, which even got good critiques. Feynman himself experienced attempts at bribery.

Mathematics[edit]

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May ) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Largely in the US, but increasingly in other nations, K- Mathematics textbooks have reflected the controversies of new math and reform mathematics which have sought to replace traditional mathematics in what have been called the math wars. Traditional texts, still favored in Asia and other areas, merely taught the same time-tested mathematics that most adults have learned. By contrast "progressive" approaches seek to address problems in social inequity[citation needed] with approaches that often incorporate principles of constructivism and discovery. Texts such as TERC and CMP discourage or omit standard mathematics methods and concepts such as long division and lowest common denominators. For example, an index entry to multiply fractions would lead to "devise your own method to multiply fractions which work on these examples", and the formula for the area of a circle would be an exercise for a student to derive rather than including it in the student text. By the s, while some districts were still adopting the more novel methods, others had abandoned them as unworkable.

Higher education[edit]
In the U.S., college and university textbooks are chosen by the professor teaching the course, or by the department as a whole. Students are typically responsible for obtaining their own copies of the books used in their courses, although alternatives to owning textbooks, such as textbook rental services and library reserve copies of texts, are available in some instances.

In some European countries, such as Sweden or Spain, students attending institutions of higher education pay for textbooks themselves, although higher education is free of charge otherwise.

With higher education costs on the rise, many students are becoming sensitive to every aspect of college pricing, including textbooks, which in many cases amount to one tenth of tuition costs. The  Government Accountability Office report on college textbooks said that since the s, textbook and supply prices have risen twice the rate of inflation in the past two decades[citation needed]. A  PIRG study found that textbooks cost students $ per year, and that prices  increased four times the rate of inflation over the past decade. A June  Advisory Committee on Student Financial Assistance (ACSFA) report, “Turn the Page,” reported that the average U.S. student spends $–$ per year on textbooks.

While many groups have assigned blame to publishers, bookstores or faculty, the ACSFA also found that assigning blame to any one party—faculty, colleges, bookstores or publishers—for current textbook costs is unproductive and without merit. The report called on all parties within the industry to work together to find productive solutions, which included a movement toward open textbooks and other lower-cost digital solutions.

Textbook prices are considerably higher in law school. Students ordinarily pay close to $ for case books consisting of cases available free online.

Textbook bias on controversial topics[edit]
In cases of history, science, current events, and political textbooks, "the writer might be biased towards one way or another. Topics such as actions of a country, presidential actions, and scientific theories are common potential biases".[citation needed]

Inclusive education[edit]
Textbooks are an important aspect of inclusive education in how they incorporate inclusive language, diverse identities, and human rights, particularly as they reflect issues of culture, gender, and religion.

Culture[edit]
The defense of cultural diversity, as understood by UNESCO, is an ethical imperative, inseparable from children’s universal right to education. It implies a commitment to the fundamental rights of persons belonging to minorities and to the cultural rights that are an integral part of human rights. Culture is also central to contemporary debates on citizenship and identity, social cohesion, and the growth of knowledge- based economies. Education has a major part to play in shaping such dialogues as cultural exchanges and economic cooperation become increasingly more common. Textbooks can be used to promote cultural diversity and, in particular, nurture culture in its broadest sense understood as the “whole complex of distinctive spiritual, material, intellectual and emotional features that characterize a society or social group.”

Gender[edit]
Having concentrated on rooting out racist and xenophobic prejudice in textbooks as early as , in the s UNESCO started to tackle gender stereotypes, which are recognized as a source of enduring inequality between women and men. A research programme on the image of women was launched after the  Copenhagen World Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women to identify and characterize sexism and recommend various steps to eliminate it. The programme showed that sexism in textbooks often consists of failing to recognize the range of actual roles played by men and women in society and neglecting the real advances that have been made in terms of gender equality.

Textbooks should help students understand the roles most often assigned to women and men and recognize those aspects of social change needed to build a fairer social order that includes both sexes and sexual minorities on an equal footing with the mainstream society. Discussions prompted by reading textbooks and teacher-pupil interactions can be used to address, question, and dismiss stereotypes. Relating examples from past societies and telling stories that give prominence to other gender categories (besides men and women) and other sexual orientations (besides heterosexuality) can show the prejudicial effect of the division of humankind into two sexes and the imposition of heterosexuality.

Religion[edit]
With the rise of globalization, the multiplicity of world views and religious practices that individuals confront has increased. Textbooks are instrumental in the process of raising awareness about others’ beliefs and fostering understanding of, and respect for, the diversity of beliefs present in societies and the world at large. Textbooks can help to combat prejudice, present pluralism as an asset, and encourage mutual understandings based on respect for the right to express one’s beliefs. They contribute to promoting tolerance, critical thinking in the face of divisive stereotyping and discrimination, and the independence of individual choice.

A free cultural work (free content) is, according to the Definition of free cultural works, one that has no significant legal restriction on people's freedom to:

use the content and benefit from using it,
study the content and apply what is learned,
make and distribute copies of the content,
change and improve the content and distribute these derivative works.
Free content encompasses all works in the public domain and also those copyrighted works whose licenses honor and uphold the freedoms mentioned above. Because the Berne Convention in most countries by default grants copyright holders monopolistic control over their creations, copyright content must be explicitly declared free, usually by the referencing or inclusion of licensing statements from within the work.

Although there are a great many different definitions in regular everyday use, free content is legally very similar, if not like an identical twin, to open content. An analogy is the use of the rival terms free software and open source, which describe ideological differences rather than legal ones. For instance, the Open Knowledge Foundation's Open Definition describes "open" as synonymous to the definition of free in the "Definition of Free Cultural Works" (as also in the Open Source Definition and Free Software Definition). For such free/open content both movements recommend the same three Creative Commons licenses, the CC BY, CC BY-SA, and CC.

Legal matters[edit]
Copyright[edit]

copyright
Main article: Copyright
Copyright is a legal concept, which gives the author or creator of a work legal control over the duplication and public performance of his or her work. In many jurisdictions, this is limited by a time period after which the works then enter the public domain. Copyright laws are a balance between the rights of creators of intellectual and artistic works and the rights of others to build upon those works. During the time period of copyright the author's work may only be copied, modified, or publicly performed with the consent of the author, unless the use is a fair use. Traditional copyright control limits the use of the work of the author to those who either pay royalties to the author for usage of the authors content, or limit their use to fair use. Secondly it limits the use of content whose author cannot be found. Finally it creates a perceived barrier between authors by limiting derivative works, such as mashups and collaborative content

Public domain[edit]

public domain
Main article: Public domain
The public domain is a range of creative works whose copyright has expired, or was never established; as well as ideas and facts[nb ] which are ineligible for copyright. A public domain work is a work whose author has either relinquished to the public, or no longer can claim control over, the distribution and usage of the work. As such any person may manipulate, distribute, or otherwise utilize the work, without legal ramifications. A work in the public domain or released under a permissive licence may be referred to as "copycenter".

Copyleft[edit]
Main article: Copyleft

copyleft
Copyleft is a play on the word copyright and describes the practice of using copyright law to remove restrictions on distributing copies and modified versions of a work. The aim of copyleft is to use the legal framework of copyright to enable non-author parties to be able to reuse and, in many licensing schemes, modify content that is created by an author. Unlike works in the public domain, the author still maintains copyright over the material, however the author has granted a non-exclusive license to any person to distribute, and often modify, the work. Copyleft licenses require that any derivative works be distributed under the same terms, and that the original copyright notices be maintained. A symbol commonly associated with copyleft is a reversal of the copyright symbol, facing the other way; the opening of the C points left rather than right. Unlike the copyright symbol, the copyleft symbol does not have a codified meaning.

Usage[edit]
Projects that provide free content exist in several areas of interest, such as software, academic literature, general literature, music, images, video, and engineering. Technology has reduced the cost of publication and reduced the entry barrier sufficiently to allow for the production of widely disseminated materials by individuals or small groups. Projects to provide free literature and multimedia content have become increasingly prominent owing to the ease of dissemination of materials that is associated with the development of computer technology. Such dissemination may have been too costly prior to these technological developments.

Media[edit]

Creative Commons
Main article: Creative Commons
In media, which includes textual, audio, and visual content, free licensing schemes such as some of the licenses made by Creative Commons have allowed for the dissemination of works under a clear set of legal permissions. Not all of the Creative Commons’ licenses are entirely free: their permissions may range from very liberal general redistribution and modification of the work to a more restrictive redistribution-only licensing. Since February , Creative Commons licenses which are entirely free carry a badge indicating that they are "approved for free cultural works". Repositories exist which exclusively feature free material provide content such as photographs, clip art, music, and literature,. While extensive reuse of free content from one website in another website is legal, it is usually not sensible because of the duplicate content problem. Wikipedia is amongst the most well known databases of user uploaded free content on the web. While the vast majority of content on Wikipedia is free content, some copyrighted material is hosted under Fair-use criteria.

Software[edit]

OSI logo

FSF logo
Main article: Free and open-source software
Free and open source software, which is also often referred to as open source software and free software, is a maturing technology with major companies utilising free software to provide both services and technology to both end users and technical consumers. The ease of dissemination has allowed for increased modularity, which allows for smaller groups to contribute to projects as well as simplifying collaboration. Open source development models have been classified as having a similar peer-recognition and collaborative benefit incentives that are typified by more classical fields such as scientific research, with the social structures that result from this incentive model decreasing production cost. Given sufficient interest in a software component, by using peer-to-peer distribution methods, distribution costs of software may be reduced, removing the burden of infrastructure maintenance from developers. As distribution resources are simultaneously provided by consumers, these software distribution models are scalable, that is the method is feasible regardless of the number of consumers. In some cases, free software vendors may use peer-to-peer technology as a method of dissemination. In general, project hosting and code distribution is not a problem for the most of free projects as a number of providers offer them these services free.

Engineering and technology[edit]

Open source hardware logo
Free content principles have been translated into fields such as engineering, where designs and engineering knowledge can be readily shared and duplicated, in order to reduce overheads associated with project development. Open design principles can be applied in engineering and technological applications, with projects in mobile telephony, small-scale manufacture, the automotive industry, and even agricultural areas. Technologies such as distributed manufacturing can allow computer-aided manufacturing and computer-aided design techniques to be able to develop small-scale production of components for the development of new, or repair of existing, devices. Rapid fabrication technologies underpin these developments, which allow end users of technology to be able to construct devices from pre-existing blueprints, using software and manufacturing hardware to convert information into physical objects.

Academia[edit]

open access
Main article: Open access (publishing)
In academic work, the majority of works are not free, although the percentage of works that are open access is growing rapidly. Open access refers to online research outputs that are free of all restrictions on access (e.g. access tolls) and free of many restrictions on use (e.g. certain copyright and license restrictions). Authors may see open access publishing as a method of expanding the audience that is able to access their work to allow for greater impact of the publication, or may support it for ideological reasons. Open access publishers such as PLOS and Biomed Central provide capacity for review and publishing of free works; though such publications are currently more common in science than humanities. Various funding institutions and governing research bodies have mandated that academics must produce their works to be open-access, in order to qualify for funding, such as the National Institutes of Health, RCUK (effective ) and the EU (effective ). At an institutional level some universities, such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), have adopted open access publishing by default by introducing their own mandates. Some mandates may permit delayed publication and may charge researchers for open access publishing. Open content publication has been seen as a method of reducing costs associated with information retrieval in research, as universities typically pay to subscribe for access to content that is published through traditional means whilst improving journal quality by discouraging the submission of research articles of reduced quality. Subscriptions for non-free content journals may be expensive for universities to purchase, though the article are written and peer-reviewed by academics themselves at no cost to the publisher. This has led to disputes between publishers and some universities over subscription costs, such as the one which occurred between the University of California and the Nature Publishing Group. For teaching purposes, some universities, including MIT, provide freely available course content, such as lecture notes, video resources and tutorials. This content is distributed via Internet resources to the general public. Publication of such resources may be either by a formal institution-wide program, or alternately via informal content provided by individual academics or departments.

Legislation[edit]
Any country has its own law and legal system, sustained by its legislation, a set of law-documents — documents containing statutory obligation rules, usually law and created by legislatures. In a democratic country, each law-document is published as open media content, is in principle a free content; but in general there are no explicit license attributed for each law-document, so the license must be interpreted, is a implied license. Only few countries have explicit licenses in its law-documents, as the UK's Open Government Licence (a CC-BY compatible license). In the other countries, the implied license comes from its proper rules (general laws and rules about copyright in government works). The automatic protection provided by Berne Convention not apply to law-documents: Article . excludes the official texts from the automatic protection. It is also possible to "inherit" the license from context. The set of country's law-documents is made available through national repositories. Examples of law-document open repositories: LexML Brazil, Legislation.gov.uk, N-Lex of EU countries. In general a law-document is offered in more than one (open) official version, but the main one is that published by a government gazette. So, law-documents can eventually inherit license expressed by the repository or by the gazette that contains it.

Precursors[edit]
In the late s, Stewart Brand founded the Whole Earth Catalog and argued that technology could be liberating rather than oppressing. He coined the slogan Information wants to be free in  against limiting access to information by governmental control, preventing a public domain of information.

Background of the formation of the Free Culture movement[edit]
In , the United States Congress passed the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act which President Clinton signed into law. The legislation extended copyright protections for twenty additional years, resulting in a total guaranteed copyright term of seventy years after a creator's death. The bill was heavily lobbied by music and film corporations like Disney, and dubbed as the Mickey Mouse Protection Act. Lawrence Lessig claims copyright is an obstacle to cultural production, knowledge sharing and technological innovation, and that private interests – as opposed to public good – determine law. He travelled the country in , giving as many as a hundred speeches a year at college campuses, and sparked the movement. It led to the foundation of the first chapter of the Students for Free Culture at Swarthmore College.

In , Lessig challenged the Bono Act, taking the case to the US Supreme Court. Despite his firm belief in victory, citing the Constitution's plain language about "limited" copyright terms, Lessig only gained two dissenting votes: from Justices Stephen Breyer and John Paul Stevens.

Foundation of the Creative Commons[edit]
In , Lessig initiated Creative Commons, an alternative "some rights reserved" licensing system to the default "all rights reserved" copyright system. Lessig focuses on a fair balance between the interest of the public to use and participate into released creative works and the need of protection for a creator's work, which still enables a "read-write" remix culture.

The term “free culture” was originally used since  during the World Summit on Information Society to present the first free license for artistic creation at large, initiated by the Copyleft attitude team in France since  (named free art license). It was then developed in Lawrence Lessig's book Free Culture in .

In August  the Open Content Project, a  Creative Commons precursor by David A. Wiley, announced the Creative Commons as successor project and Wiley joined as director.

"Free Cultural Works" Definition[edit]
In / within the free culture movement, Creative Commons has been criticized by Erik Möller and Benjamin Mako Hill for lacking minimum standards for freedom. Following this, the Definition of Free Cultural Works were created as collaborative work of many, including Erik Möller, Lawrence Lessig, Benjamin Mako Hill and Richard Stallman. In February , several Creative Commons licenses were "approved for free cultural works", namely the CC BY and CC BY-SA (later also the CC). Creative commons licenses with restrictions on commercial use or derivative works were not approved.

In October  the Open Knowledge Foundation described their definition of "open", for open content and open knowledge, as synonymous to the definition of "free" in the "Definition of Free Cultural Works", noting that both are rooted in the Open Source Definition and Free Software Definition. Therefore, the same three creative commons licenses are recommended for open content and free content, CC BY, CC BY-SA, and CC. The Open Knowledge foundation defined additionally three specialized licenses for data and databases, previously unavailable, the Open Data Commons Public Domain Dedication and Licence (PDDL), the Open Data Commons Attribution License (ODC-BY) and the Open Data Commons Open Database License (ODbL).

Organizations[edit]

Creative Commons logo
The organization commonly associated with free culture is Creative Commons (CC), founded by Lawrence Lessig. CC promotes sharing creative works and diffusing ideas to produce cultural vibrance, scientific progress and business innovation.


Student organization FreeCulture.org, inspired by Lessig and founded . The Building blocks are a symbol for reuse and remixing of creative works, used also as symbol of the Remix culture.
QuestionCopyright.org is another organization whose stated mission is "to highlight the economic, artistic, and social harm caused by distribution monopolies, and to demonstrate how freedom-based distribution is better for artists and audiences." QuestionCopyright may be best known for its association with artist Nina Paley, whose multi-award-winning feature length animation Sita Sings The Blues has been held up as an extraordinarily successful example of free distribution under the aegis of the "Sita Distribution Project". The web site of the organization has a number of resources, publications, and other references related to various copyright, patent, and trademark issues.

The student organization Students for Free Culture is sometimes confusingly called "the Free Culture Movement," but that is not its official name. The organization is a subset of the greater movement. The first chapter was founded in  at Swarthmore College, and by , the organization had twenty-six chapters.

The free culture movement takes the ideals of the free and open source software movement and extends them from the field of software to all cultural and creative works. Early in Creative Commons' life, Richard Stallman (the founder of the Free Software Foundation and the free software movement) supported the organization. He withdrew his support due to the introduction of several licenses including a developing nations and the sampling licenses and later restored some support when Creative Commons retired those licenses.

The free music movement, a subset of the free culture movement, started out just as the Web rose in popularity with the Free Music Philosophy by Ram Samudrala in early . It was also based on the idea of free software by Richard Stallman and coincided with nascent open art and open information movements (referred to here as collectively as the "free culture movement"). The Free Music Philosophy used a three pronged approach to voluntarily encourage the spread of unrestricted copying, based on the fact that copies of recordings and compositions could be made and distributed with complete accuracy and ease via the Internet. The subsequent free music movement was reported on by diverse media outlets including Billboard, Forbes, Levi's Original Music Magazine, The Free Radical, Wired and The New York Times. Along with the explosion of the Web driven by open source software and Linux, the rise of PP and lossy compression, and despite the efforts of the music industry, free music became largely a reality in the early st century. Organizations such as the Electronic Frontier Foundation and Creative Commons with free information champions like Lawrence Lessig were devising numerous licenses that offered different flavors of copyright and copyleft. The question was no longer why and how music should be free, but rather how creativity would flourish while musicians developed models to generate revenue in the Internet era.

Reception[edit]
Skepticism from the FSF[edit]
Originally, Free Software Foundation founder Richard Stallman didn't see the same importance for free works beyond software. For instance for manuals and books Stallman stated in the s:

As a general rule, I don't believe that it is essential for people to have permission to modify all sorts of articles and books. The issues for writings are not necessarily the same as those for software. For example, I don't think you or I are obliged to give permission to modify articles like this one, which describe our actions and our views.

Similarly, in  Stallman said that he sees "no social imperative for free hardware designs like the imperative for free software". Other authors, such as Joshua Pearce, have argued that there is an ethical imperative for open-source hardware, specifically with respect to open-source-appropriate technology for sustainable development.

Later, Richard Stallman changed his position slightly and advocated for free sharing of information in . But, in  Stallman commented on the Megaupload founder's arrest, "I think all works meant for practical uses must be free, but that does not apply to music, since music is meant for appreciation, not for practical use." In a follow up Stallman differentiated three classes: Works of practical use should be free, Works representing points of view should be shareable but not changeable and works of art or entertainment should be copyrighted (but only for  years). In an essay in  Stallman argued that video games as software should be free but not their artwork. In  Stallman advocated for free hardware designs.

Copyright proponents[edit]
Vocal criticism against the free culture movement comes from copyright proponents.

Prominent technologist and musician Jaron Lanier discusses this perspective of Free Culture in his  book You Are Not a Gadget. Lanier's concerns include the depersonalization of crowd-sourced anonymous media (such as Wikipedia) and the economic dignity of middle-class creative artists.

Andrew Keen, a critic of Web ., criticizes some of the Free Culture ideas in his book, Cult of the Amateur, describing Lessig as an "intellectual property communist."

The decline of news media industry's market share is blamed on free culture but scholars like Clay Shirky claim that the market itself, not free culture, is what's killing the journalism industry.
The magazine's name comes from the phreaker discovery in the s that the transmission of a  hertz tone (which could be produced perfectly with a plastic toy whistle given away free with Cap'n Crunch cereal—discovered by friends of John Draper) over a long-distance trunk connection gained access to "operator mode" and allowed the user to explore aspects of the telephone system that were not otherwise accessible. The magazine was given its name by David Ruderman, who co-founded the magazine with his college friend, Eric Corley. Ruderman ended his direct involvement with the magazine three years later.

The magazine traces its origins to early Bulletin Board Systems as a place for hackers to share information and stories with each other. It was launched in , coinciding with the book of the same name and the break-up of AT&T. It is published and edited by its co-founder Emmanuel Goldstein (a pen name of Corley and allusion to George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four) and his company  Enterprises, Inc.  is released on the first Friday of the month following a season change, usually January, April, July, and October.

Goldstein has published a compilation of articles from the magazine entitled The Best of : A Hacker Odyssey. The book, an -page hardcover, has been available from July ,  in the US and August ,  in the UK and is published by Wiley.

"Hacker" term[edit]
In the usage of  and affiliates, the often loaded term "hacking" refers to grey hat hacking, which is generally understood to be any sort of technological utilization or manipulation of technology which goes above and beyond the capabilities inherent to the design of a given application. This usage attempts to maintain neutrality, as opposed to the politically charged and often contentious terms white hat hacking, which is designated as "hacking" motivated exclusively by good intentions, such as hardware modding or penetration testing, and black hat hacking, which is designated as "hacking" motivated exclusively by bad or selfish intentions or for monetary gain, such as theft of information or property (i.e. credit cards, identities, intellectual property) and vandalism or hijacking of websites, among other types of cybercrime.

Conferences and meetings[edit]

The  van, a modified New York Telephone vehicle.
 established the H.O.P.E. (Hackers on Planet Earth) conference in , marking the publications tenth anniversary. The conference is held at the Hotel Pennsylvania, in Manhattan, New York City, and has occurred every two years with the exception of the second HOPE in , held at the Puck Building in Manhattan. The convention features events such as presentations, talks, concerts, and workshops. Speakers have included computer security figures and hackers such as Kevin Mitnick, Steven Levy, Richard Stallman, and Steve Wozniak, as well as whistleblowers William Binney, Daniel Ellsberg, and Edward Snowden, and countercultural figures like Jello Biafra and The Yes Men.

There are monthly meetings in over  countries. The meetings are listed in the back of the magazine, and are advertised as being open to anyone regardless of age or level of expertise.

In other media[edit]
 Films has made a feature-length documentary about famed hacker Kevin Mitnick, the Free Kevin movement and the hacker world, entitled Freedom Downtime, and is currently working on one titled Speakers' World.

Corley is also host of Off The Wall and Off the Hook, two New York talk radio shows. Both shows can be downloaded or streamed via the  site, and are also broadcast on various radio stations:

Off the Hook is broadcast on WBAI (. FM) and WBCQ ( shortwave).
Off The Wall is broadcast on WUSB (. FM).
In the  movie Hackers, the character of Emmanuel Goldstein / aka 'Cereal Killer' was portayed by Matthew Lillard.

Court cases[edit]
 has been involved in many court cases related to technology and freedom of speech alongside the Electronic Frontier Foundation, perhaps most significantly Universal v. Reimerdes involving the distribution of DVD copy protection tool DeCSS, where courts upheld the constitutionality of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act anti-circumvention provisions.

The magazine itself received a copyright claim for the ink spatter stock image featured on the Spring  issue from Trunk Archive, an image licensing agency, using an automated image tracking toolkit. While Trunk Archive identified its own image that featured the ink spatter as the source, it was discovered that the original ink spatter was created by an artist on DeviantArt who had released it into the public domain. Trunk Archive later retracted the claim and sent a letter to  apologizing for the mistake.
v t e
The City of New York, often called New York City or simply New York, is the most populous city in the United States. With an estimated  population of ,, distributed over a land area of about . square miles ( km), New York City is also the most densely populated major city in the United States. Located at the southern tip of the state of New York, the city is the center of the New York metropolitan area, one of the most populous urban agglomerations in the world. A global power city, New York City exerts a significant impact upon commerce, finance, media, art, fashion, research, technology, education, and entertainment, its fast pace defining the term New York minute. Home to the headquarters of the United Nations, New York is an important center for international diplomacy and has been described as the cultural, financial, and media capital of the world.

Situated on one of the world's largest natural harbors, New York City consists of five boroughs, each of which is a separate county of New York State. The five boroughs – Brooklyn, Queens, Manhattan, The Bronx, and Staten Island – were consolidated into a single city in . The city and its metropolitan area constitute the premier gateway for legal immigration to the United States, and as many as  languages are spoken in New York, making it the most linguistically diverse city in the world. New York City is home to more than . million residents born outside the United States, the world's largest foreign-born population of any city. By  estimates, the New York City metropolitan region remains by a significant margin the most populous in the United States, as defined by both the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA), . million residents, and the Combined Statistical Area (CSA), . million residents. In , the MSA produced a gross metropolitan product (GMP) of nearly US$. trillion. In , the CSA generated a GMP of over US$. trillion. NYC's MSA and CSA GDP are higher than the GDPs of all but  and  countries, respectively.

New York City traces its origin to its  founding in Lower Manhattan as a trading post by colonists of the Dutch Republic and was named New Amsterdam in . The city and its surroundings came under English control in  and were renamed New York after King Charles II of England granted the lands to his brother, the Duke of York. New York served as the capital of the United States from  until . It has been the country's largest city since . The Statue of Liberty greeted millions of immigrants as they came to the Americas by ship in the late th and early th centuries and is a symbol of the United States and its democracy. In the st century, New York has emerged as a global node of creativity and entrepreneurship, social tolerance, and environmental sustainability.

Many districts and landmarks in New York City have become well known, and the city received a record  million tourists in , hosting three of the world's ten most visited tourist attractions in . Several sources have ranked New York the most photographed city in the world. Times Square, iconic as the world's "heart" and its "Crossroads", is the brightly illuminated hub of the Broadway Theater District, one of the world's busiest pedestrian intersections, and a major center of the world's entertainment industry. The names of many of the city's bridges, tapered skyscrapers, and parks are known around the world. Anchored by Wall Street in the Financial District of Lower Manhattan, New York City has been called both the most economically powerful city and the leading financial center of the world, and the city is home to the world's two largest stock exchanges by total market capitalization, the New York Stock Exchange and NASDAQ. Manhattan's real estate market is among the most expensive in the world. Manhattan's Chinatown incorporates the highest concentration of Chinese people in the Western Hemisphere, with multiple signature Chinatowns developing across the city. Providing continuous / service, the New York City Subway is one of the most extensive metro systems worldwide, with  stations in operation. Over  colleges and universities are located in New York City, including Columbia University, New York University, and Rockefeller University, which have been ranked among the top  in the world.

History
Main article: History of New York City
See also: Timeline of New York City
Etymology and early history
During the Wisconsinan glaciation, the New York City region was situated at the edge of a large ice sheet over , feet in depth. The ice sheet scraped away large amounts of soil, leaving the bedrock that serves as the geologic foundation for much of New York City today. Later on, movement of the ice sheet would contribute to the separation of what are now Long Island and Staten Island.

In the precolonial era, the area of present-day New York City was inhabited by various bands of Algonquian tribes of Native Americans, including the Lenape, whose homeland, known as Lenapehoking, included Staten Island; the western portion of Long Island, including the area that would become Brooklyn and Queens; Manhattan; the Bronx; and the Lower Hudson Valley.

The first documented visit by a European was in  by Giovanni da Verrazzano, a Florentine explorer in the service of the French crown, who sailed his ship La Dauphine into New York Harbor. He claimed the area for France and named it Nouvelle Angoulême (New Angoulême).

A pen drawing of two men in th-century Dutch clothing presenting an open box of items to a group of Native Americans in feather headdresses stereotypical of plains tribes.
Peter Minuit is credited with the purchase of the island of Manhattan in .
A Spanish expedition led by captain Estêvão Gomes, a Portuguese sailing for Emperor Charles V, arrived in New York Harbor in January  aboard the purpose-built caravel La Anunciada and charted the mouth of the Hudson River, which he named Río de San Antonio (Saint Anthony's River). Heavy ice kept him from further exploration, and he returned to Spain in August. The Padrón Real of , the first scientific map to show North America's east coast continuously, was informed by Gomes' expedition and labeled the Northeastern U.S. as Tierra de Esteban Gómez in his honor.

In , the English explorer Henry Hudson rediscovered the region when he sailed his ship the Halve Maen ("Half Moon" in Dutch) into New York Harbor while searching for the Northwest Passage to the Orient for the Dutch East India Company. He proceeded to sail up what the Dutch would name the North River (now the Hudson River), named first by Hudson as the Mauritius after Maurice, Prince of Orange. Hudson's first mate described the harbor as "a very good Harbour for all windes" and the river as "a mile broad" and "full of fish." Hudson sailed roughly  miles north, past the site of the present-day Albany, in the belief that it might be an oceanic tributary before the river became too shallow to continue. He made a ten-day exploration of the area and claimed the region for the Dutch East India Company. In , the area between Cape Cod and Delaware Bay would be claimed by the Netherlands and called Nieuw-Nederland (New Netherland).

The first non-Native American inhabitant of what would eventually become New York City was Dominican trader Juan Rodriguez (transliterated to Dutch as Jan Rodrigues). Born in Santo Domingo of Portuguese and African descent, he arrived in Manhattan during the winter of –, trapping for pelts and trading with the local population as a representative of the Dutch. Broadway, from th Street to th Street in Upper Manhattan, is named Juan Rodriguez Way in his honor.

A painting of a coastline dotted with red roof houses and a windmill, with several masted ships sailing close to shore under blue sky.
New Amsterdam, centered in the eventual Lower Manhattan, in , the year England took control and renamed it "New York".
A permanent European presence in New Netherland began in  – making New York the th oldest continuously occupied European-established settlement in the continental United States – with the founding of a Dutch fur trading settlement on Governors Island. In , construction was started on a citadel and Fort Amsterdam on Manhattan Island, later called Nieuw Amsterdam (New Amsterdam). The colony of New Amsterdam was centered at the site which would eventually become Lower Manhattan. In , the Dutch colonial Director-General Peter Minuit, acting as charged by the Dutch West India Company, purchased the island of Manhattan from the Canarsie, a small Lenape band, for  guilders (about $, in ). A disproved legend claims that Manhattan was purchased for $ worth of glass beads.

Following the purchase, New Amsterdam grew slowly. To attract settlers, the Dutch instituted the patroon system in , whereby wealthy Dutchmen ("patroons", or patrons) who brought  colonists to New Netherland would be awarded swathes of land in New Netherland, along with local political autonomy and rights to participate in the lucrative fur trade. This program had little success.

Since , the Dutch West India Company had operated as a monopoly in New Netherland, on authority granted by the Dutch States General. In –, in an effort to bolster economy growth, the Dutch West India Company relinquished its monopoly over the fur trade in New Netherland, leading to growth in the production and trade of food, timber, tobacco, and slaves (particularly with the Dutch West Indies).

In , Peter Stuyvesant began his tenure as the last Director-General of New Netherland. During his tenure, the population of New Amsterdam grew from , to ,. Stuyvesant has been credited with improving law and order in the colony; however, he also earned a reputation as a despotic leader. He instituted regulations on liquor sales, attempted to assert control over the Dutch Reformed Church, and blocked other religious groups (including Quakers, Jews, and Lutherans) from establishing houses of worship. The Dutch West India Company would eventually attempt to ease tensions between Stuyvesant and residents of New Amsterdam.

In , unable to summon any significant resistance, Stuyvesant surrendered New Amsterdam to English troops led by Colonel Richard Nicolls without bloodshed. The terms of the surrender permitted Dutch residents to remain in the colony and allowed for religious freedom. The English promptly renamed the fledgling city "New York" after the Duke of York (the future King James II of England). The transfer was confirmed in  by the Treaty of Breda, which concluded the Second Anglo-Dutch War.

On August , , during the Third Anglo-Dutch War, Dutch captain Anthony Colve seized the colony of New York from England at the behest of Cornelis Evertsen the Youngest and rechristened it "New Orange" after William III, the Prince of Orange. The Dutch would soon return the island to England under the Treaty of Westminster of November .

Several intertribal wars among the Native Americans and some epidemics brought on by contact with the Europeans caused sizable population losses for the Lenape between the years  and . By , the Lenape population had diminished to . New York experienced several yellow fever epidemics in the th century, losing ten percent of its population to the disease in  alone.

New York grew in importance as a trading port while under British rule in the early s. It also became a center of slavery, with % of households holding slaves by , more than any other city other than Charleston, South Carolina. Most slaveholders held a few or several domestic slaves, but others hired them out to work at labor. Slavery became integrally tied to New York's economy through the labor of slaves throughout the port, and the banks and shipping tied to the American South. Discovery of the African Burying Ground in the s, during construction of a new federal courthouse near Foley Square, revealed that tens of thousands of Africans had been buried in the area in the colonial years.

The  trial and acquittal in Manhattan of John Peter Zenger, who had been accused of seditious libel after criticizing colonial governor William Cosby, helped to establish the freedom of the press in North America. In , Columbia University was founded under charter by King George II as King's College in Lower Manhattan.

Colonial era soldiers stand and kneel while firing muskets at and advancing enemy. Behind them is a mounted soldier with a bayonet and behind them is a large flag.
The Battle of Long Island, the largest battle of the American Revolution, took place in Brooklyn in .
The Stamp Act Congress met in New York in October  as the Sons of Liberty organized in the city, skirmishing over the next ten years with British troops stationed there. The Battle of Long Island, the largest battle of the American Revolutionary War, was fought in August  entirely within the modern-day borough of Brooklyn. After the battle, in which the Americans were defeated, the British made the city their military and political base of operations in North America. The city was a haven for Loyalist refugees and escaped slaves who joined the British lines for freedom newly promised by the Crown for all fighters. As many as , escaped slaves crowded into the city during the British occupation. When the British forces evacuated at the close of the war in , they transported , freedmen for resettlement in Nova Scotia. They resettled other freedmen in England and the Caribbean.

The only attempt at a peaceful solution to the war took place at the Conference House on Staten Island between American delegates, including Benjamin Franklin, and British general Lord Howe on September , . Shortly after the British occupation began, the Great Fire of New York occurred, a large conflagration on the West Side of Lower Manhattan, which destroyed about a quarter of the buildings in the city, including Trinity Church.

In , the assembly of the Congress of the Confederation made New York the national capital shortly after the war. New York was the last capital of the U.S. under the Articles of Confederation and the first capital under the Constitution of the United States. In , the first President of the United States, George Washington, was inaugurated; the first United States Congress and the Supreme Court of the United States each assembled for the first time, and the United States Bill of Rights was drafted, all at Federal Hall on Wall Street. By , New York had surpassed Philadelphia as the largest city in the United States.

A painting of a snowy city street with horse-drawn sleds and a th-century fire truck under blue sky
Broadway follows the Native American Wickquasgeck Trail through Manhattan.
Under New York State's gradual abolition act of , children of slave mothers were to be eventually liberated but to be held in indentured servitude until their mid-to-late twenties. Together with slaves freed by their masters after the Revolutionary War and escaped slaves, a significant free-black population gradually developed in Manhattan. Under such influential United States founders as Alexander Hamilton and John Jay, the New York Manumission Society worked for abolition and established the African Free School to educate black children. It was not until  that slavery was completely abolished in the state, and free blacks struggled afterward with discrimination. New York interracial abolitionist activism continued; among its leaders were graduates of the African Free School. The city's black population reached more than , in .

In the th century, the city was transformed by development relating to its status as a trading center, as well as by European immigration. The city adopted the Commissioners' Plan of , which expanded the city street grid to encompass all of Manhattan. The  completion of the Erie Canal through central New York connected the Atlantic port to the agricultural markets and commodities of the North American interior via the Hudson River and the Great Lakes. Local politics became dominated by Tammany Hall, a political machine supported by Irish and German immigrants.

Several prominent American literary figures lived in New York during the s and s, including William Cullen Bryant, Washington Irving, Herman Melville, Rufus Wilmot Griswold, John Keese, Nathaniel Parker Willis, and Edgar Allan Poe. Public-minded members of the contemporaneous business elite lobbied for the establishment of Central Park, which in  became the first landscaped park in an American city.

Modern history

Manhattan's Little Italy, Lower East Side, circa .
The Great Irish Famine brought a large influx of Irish immigrants. Over , were living in New York by , upwards of a quarter of the city's population. There was also extensive immigration from the German provinces, where revolutions had disrupted societies, and Germans comprised another % of New York's population by .

Democratic Party candidates were consistently elected to local office, increasing the city's ties to the South and its dominant party. In , Mayor Fernando Wood called upon the aldermen to declare independence from Albany and the United States after the South seceded, but his proposal was not acted on. Anger at new military conscription laws during the American Civil War (–), which spared wealthier men who could afford to pay a $ (equivalent to $, in ) commutation fee to hire a substitute, led to the Draft Riots of , whose most visible participants were ethnic Irish working class. The situation deteriorated into attacks on New York's elite, followed by attacks on black New Yorkers and their property after fierce competition for a decade between Irish immigrants and black people for work. Rioters burned the Colored Orphan Asylum to the ground, with more than  children escaping harm due to efforts of the New York City Police Department, which was mainly made up of Irish immigrants. According to historian James M. McPherson (), at least  people were killed. In all, eleven black men were lynched over five days, and the riots forced hundreds of blacks to flee the city for Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and New Jersey; the black population in Manhattan fell below , by , which it had last been in . The white working class had established dominance. Violence by longshoremen against black men was especially fierce in the docks area. It was one of the worst incidents of civil unrest in American history.

A man working on a steel girder high about a city skyline.
A construction worker on top of the Empire State Building as it was being built in . The Chrysler Building is below and behind him.
In , the modern City of New York was formed with the consolidation of Brooklyn (until then a separate city), the County of New York (which then included parts of the Bronx), the County of Richmond, and the western portion of the County of Queens. The opening of the subway in , first built as separate private systems, helped bind the new city together. Throughout the first half of the th century, the city became a world center for industry, commerce, and communication.

In , the steamship General Slocum caught fire in the East River, killing , people on board. In , the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire, the city's worst industrial disaster, took the lives of  garment workers and spurred the growth of the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union and major improvements in factory safety standards.


UN Secretary General Dag Hammarskjöld in front of the United Nations Headquarters building, completed in 
New York's non-white population was , in . New York City was a prime destination in the early twentieth century for African Americans during the Great Migration from the American South, and by , New York City was home to the largest urban African diaspora in North America. The Harlem Renaissance of literary and cultural life flourished during the era of Prohibition. The larger economic boom generated construction of skyscrapers competing in height and creating an identifiable skyline.

New York became the most populous urbanized area in the world in the early s, overtaking London. The metropolitan area surpassed the  million mark in the early s, becoming the first megacity in human history. The difficult years of the Great Depression saw the election of reformer Fiorello La Guardia as mayor and the fall of Tammany Hall after eighty years of political dominance.

Returning World War II veterans created a post-war economic boom and the development of large housing tracts in eastern Queens. New York emerged from the war unscathed as the leading city of the world, with Wall Street leading America's place as the world's dominant economic power. The United Nations Headquarters was completed in , solidifying New York's global geopolitical influence, and the rise of abstract expressionism in the city precipitated New York's displacement of Paris as the center of the art world.

A two-story building with brick on the first floor, with two arched doorways, and gray stucco on the second floor off of which hang numerous rainbow flags.
The Stonewall Inn in Greenwich Village, a designated U.S. National Historic Landmark and National Monument, as the site of the  Stonewall riots.
The Stonewall riots were a series of spontaneous, violent demonstrations by members of the gay community against a police raid that took place in the early morning hours of June , , at the Stonewall Inn in the Greenwich Village neighborhood of Lower Manhattan. They are widely considered to constitute the single most important event leading to the gay liberation movement and the modern fight for LGBT rights in the United States.

In the s, job losses due to industrial restructuring caused New York City to suffer from economic problems and rising crime rates. While a resurgence in the financial industry greatly improved the city's economic health in the s, New York's crime rate continued to increase through that decade and into the beginning of the s. By the mid s, crime rates started to drop dramatically due to revised police strategies, improving economic opportunities, gentrification, and new residents, both American transplants and new immigrants from Asia and Latin America. Important new sectors, such as Silicon Alley, emerged in the city's economy. New York's population reached all-time highs in the  Census and then again in the  Census.

Two tall, gray, rectangular buildings spewing black smoke and flames, particularly from the left of the two.
United Airlines Flight  hits the South Tower of the original World Trade Center on September , .
The city and surrounding area suffered the bulk of the economic damage and largest loss of human life in the aftermath of the September ,  attacks when  of the  terrorists associated with Al-Qaeda piloted American Airlines Flight  into the North Tower of the World Trade Center and United Airlines Flight  into the South Tower of the World Trade Center, and later destroyed them, killing , civilians,  firefighters, and  law enforcement officers who were in the towers and in the surrounding area. The rebuilding of the area, has created a new One World Trade Center, and a / memorial and museum along with other new buildings and infrastructure. The World Trade Center PATH station, which opened on July ,  as the Hudson Terminal, was also destroyed in the attack. A temporary station was built and opened on November , . An ,-square-foot (, m) permanent station designed by Santiago Calatrava, the World Trade Center Transportation Hub, the city's third-largest hub, was completed in . The new One World Trade Center is the tallest skyscraper in the Western Hemisphere and the fourth-tallest building in the world by pinnacle height, with its spire reaching a symbolic , feet (. m) in reference to the year of American independence.

The Occupy Wall Street protests in Zuccotti Park in the Financial District of Lower Manhattan began on September , , receiving global attention and popularizing the Occupy movement against social and economic inequality worldwide.

Geography
Main articles: Geography of New York City and Geography of New York Harbor

Satellite imagery illustrating the core of the New York City Metropolitan Area, with Manhattan Island at its center
New York City is situated in the Northeastern United States, in southeastern New York State, approximately halfway between Washington, D.C. and Boston. The location at the mouth of the Hudson River, which feeds into a naturally sheltered harbor and then into the Atlantic Ocean, has helped the city grow in significance as a trading port. Most of New York City is built on the three islands of Long Island, Manhattan, and Staten Island.

The Hudson River flows through the Hudson Valley into New York Bay. Between New York City and Troy, New York, the river is an estuary. The Hudson River separates the city from the U.S. state of New Jersey. The East River—a tidal strait—flows from Long Island Sound and separates the Bronx and Manhattan from Long Island. The Harlem River, another tidal strait between the East and Hudson Rivers, separates most of Manhattan from the Bronx. The Bronx River, which flows through the Bronx and Westchester County, is the only entirely fresh water river in the city.

The city's land has been altered substantially by human intervention, with considerable land reclamation along the waterfronts since Dutch colonial times; reclamation is most prominent in Lower Manhattan, with developments such as Battery Park City in the s and s. Some of the natural relief in topography has been evened out, especially in Manhattan.

The city's total area is . square miles (,. km), including . sq mi (. km) of land and . sq mi (. km) of this is water. The highest point in the city is Todt Hill on Staten Island, which, at . feet (. m) above sea level, is the highest point on the Eastern Seaboard south of Maine. The summit of the ridge is mostly covered in woodlands as part of the Staten Island Greenbelt.

View of Midtown Manhattan at night, from across the Hudson River in Weehawken, New Jersey.

View of Lower Manhattan at sunset, from Jersey City, New Jersey. One World Trade Center is the tallest skyscraper in the Western Hemisphere.

Ten-mile Manhattan panorama from th Street to the Battery, taken June  from Weehawken, New Jersey: .Riverside Church, . Time Warner Buildings, .  Central Park South S, . One, .  Park Avenue, . Chrysler Building, . Bank of America Tower, . Conde Nast Building, . The New York Times Building, . Empire State Building, . Met Life Tower, -. Hudson Yards, .  Leonard Street, .  Spruce Street, . Woolworth Building, .  Pine Street, .  Park Place, .  Wall Street, . Three World Trade Center, . Four World Trade Center, . One World Trade Center.
Architecture
Further information: Architecture of New York City and List of tallest buildings in New York City

Modernist architecture juxtaposed with classical architecture is seen often in New York City.


The Chrysler Building, above, built in , is an example of the Art Deco style, with ornamental hub caps and a spire. The Empire State Building is a solitary icon of New York. It was the world's tallest building – and is defined by its setbacks, Art Deco details and the spire.
A view down a street with rowhouses in brown, white, and various shades of red.
Landmark th-century rowhouses, including brownstones, on tree-lined Kent Street in the Greenpoint Historic District, Brooklyn.
New York has architecturally noteworthy buildings in a wide range of styles and from distinct time periods, from the saltbox style Pieter Claesen Wyckoff House in Brooklyn, the oldest section of which dates to , to the modern One World Trade Center, the skyscraper at Ground Zero in Lower Manhattan and the most expensive office tower in the world by construction cost.

Manhattan's skyline, with its many skyscrapers, is universally recognized, and the city has been home to several of the tallest buildings in the world. As of , New York City had , high-rise buildings, of which  completed structures were at least  feet ( m) high, both second in the world after Hong Kong, with over  completed skyscrapers taller than  feet ( m). These include the Woolworth Building, an early example of Gothic Revival architecture in skyscraper design, built with massively scaled Gothic detailing; completed in , for  years it was the world's tallest building.

The  Zoning Resolution required setbacks in new buildings and restricted towers to a percentage of the lot size, to allow sunlight to reach the streets below. The Art Deco style of the Chrysler Building () and Empire State Building (), with their tapered tops and steel spires, reflected the zoning requirements. The buildings have distinctive ornamentation, such as the eagles at the corners of the st floor on the Chrysler Building, and are considered some of the finest examples of the Art Deco style. A highly influential example of the international style in the United States is the Seagram Building (), distinctive for its façade using visible bronze-toned I-beams to evoke the building's structure. The Condé Nast Building () is a prominent example of green design in American skyscrapers and has received an award from the American Institute of Architects and AIA New York State for its design.

The character of New York's large residential districts is often defined by the elegant brownstone rowhouses and townhouses and shabby tenements that were built during a period of rapid expansion from  to . In contrast, New York City also has neighborhoods that are less densely populated and feature free-standing dwellings. In neighborhoods such as Riverdale (in the Bronx), Ditmas Park (in Brooklyn), and Douglaston (in Queens), large single-family homes are common in various architectural styles such as Tudor Revival and Victorian.

Stone and brick became the city's building materials of choice after the construction of wood-frame houses was limited in the aftermath of the Great Fire of . A distinctive feature of many of the city's buildings is the wooden roof-mounted water towers. In the s, the city required their installation on buildings higher than six stories to prevent the need for excessively high water pressures at lower elevations, which could break municipal water pipes. Garden apartments became popular during the s in outlying areas, such as Jackson Heights.

According to the United States Geological Survey, an updated analysis of seismic hazard in July  revealed a "slightly lower hazard for tall buildings" in New York City than previously assessed. Scientists estimated this lessened risk based upon a lower likelihood than previously thought of slow shaking near the city, which would be more likely to cause damage to taller structures from an earthquake in the vicinity of the city.
Sources: see individual borough articles
New York City is often referred to collectively as the five boroughs, and in turn, there are hundreds of distinct neighborhoods throughout the boroughs, many with a definable history and character to call their own. If the boroughs were each independent cities, four of the boroughs (Brooklyn, Queens, Manhattan, and the Bronx) would be among the ten most populous cities in the United States (Staten island would be ranked th) ; these same boroughs are coterminous with the four most densely populated counties in the United States (New York [Manhattan], Kings [Brooklyn], Bronx, and Queens).

Manhattan (New York County) is the geographically smallest and most densely populated borough and is home to Central Park and most of the city's skyscrapers. Manhattan's (New York County's) population density of , people per square mile (,/km²) in  makes it the highest of any county in the United States and higher than the density of any individual American city. Manhattan is the cultural, administrative, and financial center of New York City and contains the headquarters of many major multinational corporations, the United Nations Headquarters, Wall Street, and a number of important universities. Manhattan is often described as the financial and cultural center of the world.
Most of the borough is situated on Manhattan Island, at the mouth of the Hudson River. Several small islands are also part of the borough of Manhattan, including Randall's Island, Wards Island, and Roosevelt Island in the East River, and Governors Island and Liberty Island to the south in New York Harbor. Manhattan Island is loosely divided into Lower, Midtown, and Uptown regions. Uptown Manhattan is divided by Central Park into the Upper East Side and the Upper West Side, and above the park is Harlem. The borough also includes a small neighborhood on the United States mainland, called Marble Hill, which is contiguous with The Bronx. New York City's remaining four boroughs are collectively referred to as the outer boroughs.
Brooklyn (Kings County), on the western tip of Long Island, is the city's most populous borough. Brooklyn is known for its cultural, social, and ethnic diversity, an independent art scene, distinct neighborhoods, and a distinctive architectural heritage. Downtown Brooklyn is the only central core neighborhood in the outer boroughs. The borough has a long beachfront shoreline including Coney Island, established in the s as one of the earliest amusement grounds in the country. Marine Park and Prospect Park are the two largest parks in Brooklyn.
Queens (Queens County), on Long Island north and east of Brooklyn, is geographically the largest borough, the most ethnically diverse county in the United States, and the most ethnically diverse urban area in the world. Historically a collection of small towns and villages founded by the Dutch, the borough has since developed both commercial and residential prominence. Queens is the site of Citi Field, the baseball stadium of the New York Mets, and hosts the annual U.S. Open tennis tournament at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park. Additionally, two of the three busiest airports serving the New York metropolitan area, John F. Kennedy International Airport and LaGuardia Airport, are located in Queens. (The third is Newark Liberty International Airport in Newark, New Jersey.)
Staten Island (Richmond County) is the most suburban in character of the five boroughs. Staten Island is connected to Brooklyn by the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge and to Manhattan by way of the free Staten Island Ferry, a daily commuter ferry which provides unobstructed views of the Statue of Liberty, Ellis Island, and Lower Manhattan. In central Staten Island, the Staten Island Greenbelt spans approximately , acres ( km), including  miles ( km) of walking trails and one of the last undisturbed forests in the city. Designated in  to protect the island's natural lands, the Greenbelt comprises seven city parks.
The Bronx (Bronx County) is New York City's northernmost borough and the only New York City borough with a majority of it a part of the mainland United States. It is the location of Yankee Stadium, the baseball park of the New York Yankees, and home to the largest cooperatively owned housing complex in the United States, Co-op City. It is also home to the Bronx Zoo, the world's largest metropolitan zoo, which spans  acres (. km) and houses over , animals. The Bronx is also the birthplace of rap and hip hop culture. Pelham Bay Park is the largest park in New York City, at , acres (, ha).
Climate

Avenue C in Manhattan after flooding caused by Hurricane Sandy on October , .
Under the Köppen climate classification, using the  °C ( °F) isotherm, New York City features a humid subtropical climate (Cfa), and is thus the northernmost major city on the North American continent with this categorization. The suburbs to the immediate north and west lie in the transitional zone between humid subtropical and humid continental climates (Dfa). The city averages  days with at least some sunshine annually, and averages % of possible sunshine annually, accumulating , hours of sunshine per annum. The city lies in the USDA b plant hardiness zone.

Winters are cold and damp, and prevailing wind patterns that blow offshore temper the moderating effects of the Atlantic Ocean; yet the Atlantic and the partial shielding from colder air by the Appalachians keep the city warmer in the winter than inland North American cities at similar or lesser latitudes such as Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, and Indianapolis. The daily mean temperature in January, the area's coldest month, is . °F (. °C); temperatures usually drop to  °F (− °C) several times per winter, and reach  °F ( °C) several days in the coldest winter month. Spring and autumn are unpredictable and can range from chilly to warm, although they are usually mild with low humidity. Summers are typically warm to hot and humid, with a daily mean temperature of . °F (. °C) in July. Nighttime conditions are often exacerbated by the urban heat island phenomenon, while daytime temperatures exceed  °F ( °C) on average of  days each summer and in some years exceed  °F ( °C). Extreme temperatures have ranged from − °F (− °C), recorded on February , , up to  °F ( °C) on July , . The average water temperature of the nearby Atlantic Ocean ranges from . °F (. °C) in February to . °F (. °C) in August.

The city receives . inches (, mm) of precipitation annually, which is relatively evenly spread throughout the year. Average winter snowfall between  and  has been . inches ( cm); this varies considerably from year to year. Hurricanes and tropical storms are rare in the New York area, but they are not unheard of and always have the potential to strike the area. Hurricane Sandy brought a destructive storm surge to New York City on the evening of October , , flooding numerous streets, tunnels, and subway lines in Lower Manhattan and other areas of the city and cutting off electricity in many parts of the city and its suburbs. The storm and its profound impacts have prompted the discussion of constructing seawalls and other coastal barriers around the shorelines of the city and the metropolitan area to minimize the risk of destructive consequences from another such event in the future.
Source: NOAA (relative humidity and sun –)
See Geography of New York City for additional climate information from the outer boroughs.
►
See or edit raw graph data.



Parks
A spherical sculpture and several attractions line a park during a World's Fair.
Flushing Meadows–Corona Park was used in the  New York World's Fair, with the Unisphere as its centerpiece.
The City of New York has a complex park system, with various lands operated by the National Park Service, the New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation, and the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation.

In its  ParkScore ranking, the Trust for Public Land reported that the park system in New York City was the second best park system among the  most populous US cities, behind the park system of Minneapolis. ParkScore ranks urban park systems by a formula that analyzes median park size, park acres as percent of city area, the percent of city residents within a half-mile of a park, spending of park services per resident, and the number of playgrounds per , residents.

National parks

The Statue of Liberty on Liberty Island in New York Harbor is a symbol of the United States and its ideals of freedom, democracy, and opportunity.
Main article: National Park Service
Gateway National Recreation Area contains over , acres (,. ha) in total, most of it surrounded by New York City, including the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge. In Brooklyn and Queens, the park contains over , acres ( km) of salt marsh, wetlands, islands, and water, including most of Jamaica Bay. Also in Queens, the park includes a significant portion of the western Rockaway Peninsula, most notably Jacob Riis Park and Fort Tilden. In Staten Island, Gateway National Recreation Area includes Fort Wadsworth, with historic pre-Civil War era Battery Weed and Fort Tompkins, and Great Kills Park, with beaches, trails, and a marina.

The Statue of Liberty National Monument and Ellis Island Immigration Museum are managed by the National Park Service and are in both the states of New York and New Jersey. They are joined in the harbor by Governors Island National Monument, in New York. Historic sites under federal management on Manhattan Island include Castle Clinton National Monument; Federal Hall National Memorial; Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace National Historic Site; General Grant National Memorial ("Grant's Tomb"); African Burial Ground National Monument; and Hamilton Grange National Memorial. Hundreds of private properties are listed on the National Register of Historic Places or as a National Historic Landmark such as, for example, the Stonewall Inn, part of the Stonewall National Monument in Greenwich Village, as the catalyst of the modern gay rights movement.

State parks
Main article: New York State Parks
There are seven state parks within the confines of New York City, including Clay Pit Ponds State Park Preserve, a natural area that includes extensive riding trails, and Riverbank State Park, a -acre (, m) facility that rises  feet ( m) over the Hudson River.

City parks

Reindeer at the Bronx Zoo, the world's largest metropolitan zoo.
See also: Parks and recreation in New York City
New York City has over , acres ( km) of municipal parkland and  miles ( km) of public beaches. The largest municipal park in the city is Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx, with , acres (, ha).

Central Park, an -acre (. km) park in middle-upper Manhattan, is the most visited urban park in the United States and one of the most filmed locations in the world, with  million visitors in . The park contains a myriad of attractions; there are several lakes and ponds, two ice-skating rinks, the Central Park Zoo, the Central Park Conservatory Garden, and the -acre (. km) Jackie Onassis Reservoir. Indoor attractions include Belvedere Castle with its nature center, the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, and the historic Carousel. On October , , hedge fund manager John A. Paulson announced a $ million gift to the Central Park Conservancy, the largest ever monetary donation to New York City's park system.
Washington Square Park is a prominent landmark in the Greenwich Village neighborhood of Lower Manhattan. The Washington Square Arch at the northern gateway to the park is an iconic symbol of both New York University and Greenwich Village.
Prospect Park in Brooklyn has a -acre (, m) meadow, a lake, and extensive woodlands. Within the park is the historic Battle Pass, prominent in the Battle of Long Island.
Flushing Meadows–Corona Park in Queens, with its  acres ( ha) making it the city's fourth largest park, was the setting for the  World's Fair and the  World's Fair and is host to the USTA Billie Jean King National Tennis Center and the annual United States Open Tennis Championships tournament.
Over a fifth of the Bronx's area, , acres ( km), is given over to open space and parks, including Pelham Bay Park, Van Cortlandt Park, the Bronx Zoo, and the New York Botanical Gardens.
In Staten Island, the Conference House Park contains the historic Conference House, site of the only attempt of a peaceful resolution to the American Revolution which was conducted in September , attended by Benjamin Franklin representing the Americans and Lord Howe representing the British Crown. The historic Burial Ridge, the largest Native American burial ground within New York City, is within the park.
A large rectangular park stretches to the horizon behind a city skyline.
Central Park, as seen from Rockefeller Center, is the most visited city park in the United States.
Military installations
New York City is home to Fort Hamilton, the U.S. military's only active duty installation within the city. Established in  in Brooklyn on the site of a small battery utilized during the American Revolution, it is one of America's longest serving military forts. Today Fort Hamilton serves as the headquarters of the North Atlantic Division of the United States Army Corps of Engineers and for the New York City Recruiting Battalion. It also houses the th Transportation Brigade, the nd Aeromedical Staging Squadron, and a military entrance processing station. Other formerly active military reservations still utilized for National Guard and military training or reserve operations in the city include Fort Wadsworth in Staten Island and Fort Totten in Queens.

Demographics
Main articles: Demographics of New York City, New York City ethnic enclaves, and Demographic profile of New York City
[show]City compared to State & U.S. 
[hide]Racial composition				
White	.%	.%	.%	.%
—Non-Hispanic	.%	.%	.%	.%
Black or African American	.%	.%	.%	.%
Hispanic or Latino (of any race)	.%	.%	.%	.%
Asian	.%	.%	.%	−

New York City had an estimated population density of , people per square mile (,/km²) in , with Manhattan alone at ,/sq mi (,/km²).
Historical population
Note: Census figures (–) cover the present area of all five boroughs, before and after the  consolidation. For New York City itself before annexing part of the Bronx in , see Manhattan#Demographics. Sources: –, –, –,  and ,  Census estimate.
Source:
U.S. Decennial Census
New York City is the most-populous city in the United States, with an estimated record high of ,, residents as of , incorporating more immigration into the city than outmigration since the  United States Census. More than twice as many people live in New York City as in the second-most populous U.S. city (Los Angeles), and within a smaller area. New York City gained more residents between April  and July  (,) than any other U.S. city. New York City's population is about % of New York State's population and about % of the population of the New York metropolitan area.

Population density
In , the city had an estimated population density of , people per square mile (,/km²), rendering it the most densely populated of all municipalities housing over , residents in the United States, with several small cities (of fewer than ,) in adjacent Hudson County, New Jersey having greater density, as per the  Census. Geographically co-extensive with New York County, the borough of Manhattan's  population density of , inhabitants per square mile (,/km) makes it the highest of any county in the United States and higher than the density of any individual American city.

Race and ethnicity
Further information: Chinese in New York City, Fuzhounese in New York City, Indians in New York City, Koreans in New York City, Filipinos in New York City, Bangladeshis in New York City, Japanese in New York City, Russians in New York City, Ukrainians in New York City, Irish in New York City, Italians in New York City, Caribbeans in New York City, and Puerto Ricans in New York City
The city's population in  was % white (.% non-Hispanic white), .% black (% non-Hispanic black), .% Native American, and .% Asian. Hispanics of any race represented .% of the population, while Asians constituted the fastest-growing segment of the city's population between  and ; the non-Hispanic white population declined  percent, the smallest recorded decline in decades; and for the first time since the Civil War, the number of blacks declined over a decade.





Clockwise, from upper left: the Manhattan Chinatown; Manhattan's Little Italy; Spanish Harlem; and Manhattan's Koreatown
Throughout its history, the city has been a major port of entry for immigrants into the United States; more than  million European immigrants were received at Ellis Island between  and . The term "melting pot" was first coined to describe densely populated immigrant neighborhoods on the Lower East Side. By , Germans constituted the largest immigrant group, followed by the Irish, Jews, and Italians. In , whites represented % of the city's population.

Approximately % of the city's population is foreign born and more than half of all children are born to mothers who are immigrants. In New York, no single country or region of origin dominates. The ten largest sources of foreign-born individuals in the city as of  were the Dominican Republic, China, Mexico, Guyana, Jamaica, Ecuador, Haiti, India, Russia, and Trinidad and Tobago, while the Bangladeshi-born immigrant population has become one of the fastest growing in the city, counting over , by .

Asian Americans in New York City, according to the  Census, number more than one million, greater than the combined totals of San Francisco and Los Angeles. New York contains the highest total Asian population of any U.S. city proper. The New York City borough of Queens is home to the state's largest Asian American population and the largest Andean (Colombian, Ecuadorian, Peruvian, and Bolivian) populations in the United States, and is also the most ethnically diverse urban area in the world. The Chinese population constitutes the fastest-growing nationality in New York State; multiple satellites of the original Manhattan Chinatown, in Brooklyn, and around Flushing, Queens, are thriving as traditionally urban enclaves - while also expanding rapidly eastward into suburban Nassau County on Long Island, as the New York metropolitan region and New York State have become the top destinations for new Chinese immigrants, respectively, and large-scale Chinese immigration continues into New York City and surrounding areas, with the largest metropolitan Chinese diaspora outside Asia, including an estimated , individuals in . In , .% of New York City was of Chinese ethnicity, with nearly three-fourths living in either Queens or Brooklyn, geographically on Long Island. A community numbering , Korean-Chinese (Chaoxianzu or Joseonjok) is centered in Flushing, Queens, while New York City is also home to the largest Tibetan population outside China, India, and Nepal, also centered in Queens. Koreans made up .% of the city's population, and Japanese .%. Filipinos were the largest Southeast Asian ethnic group at .%, followed by Vietnamese, who made up .% of New York City's population in . Indians are the largest South Asian group, comprising .% of the city's population, with Bangladeshis and Pakistanis at .% and .%, respectively. Queens is the preferred borough of settlement for Asian Indians, Koreans, Filipinos, and Malaysians and other Southeast Asians; while Brooklyn is receiving large numbers of both West Indian and Asian Indian immigrants.


Map of racial distribution in New York,  U.S. Census. Each dot is  people: White, Black, Asian, Hispanic or Other (yellow)
New York City has the largest European and non-Hispanic white population of any American city. At . million in , New York's non-Hispanic white population is larger than the non-Hispanic white populations of Los Angeles (. million), Chicago (,), and Houston (,) combined. The non-Hispanic white population was . million in . The non-Hispanic white population has begun to increase since . The European diaspora residing in the city is very diverse. According to  Census estimates, there were roughly , Italian Americans, , Irish Americans, , German Americans, , Russian Americans, , Polish Americans, and , English Americans. Additionally, Greek and French Americans numbered , each, with those of Hungarian descent estimated at , people. Ukrainian and Scottish Americans numbered , and ,, respectively. People identifying ancestry from Spain numbered , total in . People of Norwegian and Swedish descent both stood at about , each, while people of Czech, Lithuanian, Portuguese, Scotch-Irish, and Welsh descent all numbered between ,–, people. Arab Americans number over , in New York City, with the highest concentration in Brooklyn. Central Asians, primarily Uzbek Americans, are a rapidly growing segment of the city's non-Hispanic white population, enumerating over ,, and including over half of all Central Asian immigrants to the United States, most settling in Queens or Brooklyn. Albanian Americans are most highly concentrated in the Bronx.

The wider New York City metropolitan statistical area, with over  million people, about % greater than the second-place Los Angeles metropolitan area in the United States, is also ethnically diverse, with the largest foreign-born population of any metropolitan region in the world. The New York region continues to be by far the leading metropolitan gateway for legal immigrants admitted into the United States, substantially exceeding the combined totals of Los Angeles and Miami. It is home to the largest Jewish and Israeli communities outside Israel, with the Jewish population in the region numbering over . million in  and including many diverse Jewish sects from around the Middle East and Eastern Europe. The metropolitan area is also home to % of the nation's Indian Americans and at least  Little India enclaves, and % of all Korean Americans and four Koreatowns; the largest Asian Indian population in the Western Hemisphere; the largest Russian American, Italian American, and African American populations; the largest Dominican American, Puerto Rican American, and South American and second-largest overall Hispanic population in the United States, numbering . million; and includes multiple established Chinatowns within New York City alone.

Ecuador, Colombia, Guyana, Peru, and Brazil were the top source countries from South America for legal immigrants to the New York City region in ; the Dominican Republic, Jamaica, Haiti, and Trinidad and Tobago in the Caribbean; Egypt, Ghana, and Nigeria from Africa; and El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala in Central America. Amidst a resurgence of Puerto Rican migration to New York City, this population had increased to approximately . million in the metropolitan area as of .

Sexual orientation and gender identity
Main article: LGBT culture in New York City

The scene at the  LGBT Pride March. New York City is home to the largest LGBTQ community in the United States and one of the world's largest. 
The New York metropolitan area is home to a self-identifying gay and bisexual community estimated at nearly , individuals, the largest in the United States and one of the world's largest. Same-sex marriages in New York were legalized on June ,  and were authorized to take place beginning  days thereafter. Charles Kaiser, author of The Gay Metropolis: The Landmark History of Gay Life in America, wrote that in the era after World War II, "New York City became the literal gay metropolis for hundreds of thousands of immigrants from within and without the United States: the place they chose to learn how to live openly, honestly and without shame." The annual New York City Pride March (or gay pride parade) traverses southward down Fifth Avenue and ends at Greenwich Village in Lower Manhattan; the parade rivals the Sao Paulo Gay Pride Parade as the largest pride parade in the world, attracting tens of thousands of particpants and millions of sidewalk spectators each June.

Transgender contribution
Wayne R. Dynes, author of the Encyclopedia of Homosexuality, wrote that drag queens were the only "transgender folks around" during the June  Stonewall riots. "None of them in fact made a major contribution to the movement." Others say the transgender community in New York City played a significant role in fighting for LGBT equality during the period of the Stonewall riots and thereafter. New York City is home to the largest transgender population in the United States, estimated at , in . However, until the Stonewall riots, this community had felt marginalized and neglected by the gay community.

Religion
Christianity (%), made up of Roman Catholicism (%), Protestantism (%), and other Christians (%), was the most prevalently practiced religion in New York as of , followed by Judaism, with approximately . million Jews in New York City. over half living in Brooklyn; The Jewish population makes up .% of the city. Islam ranks third in New York City, with official estimates ranging between , and ,, observers and including % of the city's public schoolchildren, followed by Hinduism, Buddhism, and a variety of other religions, as well as atheism. In , % self-identified with no organized religious affiliation.


The landmark Neo-Gothic Roman Catholic St. Patrick's Cathedral, Midtown Manhattan

Ultra-Orthodox Jewish residents in Brooklyn. Brooklyn has the largest Jewish community in the United States, with approximately , individuals.

The Islamic Cultural Center of New York in Upper Manhattan, the first mosque built in New York City.

Ganesh Temple in Flushing, Queens, the oldest Hindu temple in the U.S.

Mahayana Buddhist Temple in Chinatown, Manhattan

Atheism, promoted on an electronic billboard in Times Square, is observed by a significant proportion of New Yorkers.
Income
New York City has a high degree of income disparity as indicated by its Gini Coefficient of . for the city overall and . for Manhattan. In the first quarter of , the average weekly wage in New York County (Manhattan) was $,, representing the highest total among large counties in the United States. As of , New York City had the second-highest number of billionaires of any city in the world with , after Beijing, including former Mayor Michael Bloomberg. New York also had the highest density of millionaires per capita among major U.S. cities in , at .% of residents. Lower Manhattan has been experiencing a baby boom, with the area south of Canal Street witnessing , births in , % greater than  and over twice the number born in .

Economy
Main article: Economy of New York City
City economic overview
Top publicly traded companies
in New York City
(ranked by  revenues)
with City and U.S. ranks
NYC		corporation		US
		Verizon Communications		
		JPMorgan Chase		
		Citigroup		
		MetLife		
		American International Group		
		Pfizer (pharmaceuticals)		
		New York Life		
		Goldman Sachs		
		Morgan Stanley		
		TIAA (Teachers Ins. & Annuity)		
		INTL FCStone		
		American Express		
Every firm's revenue exceeded $ billion
Financial services firms in green
Full table at Economy of New York City
Source: Fortune 
New York is a global hub of international business and commerce. In , New York City topped the first Global Economic Power Index, published by The Atlantic (to be differentiated from a namesake list published by the Martin Prosperity Institute), with cities ranked according to criteria reflecting their presence on similar lists as published by other entities. The city is a major center for banking and finance, retailing, world trade, transportation, tourism, real estate, new media, traditional media, advertising, legal services, accountancy, insurance, theater, fashion, and the arts in the United States; while Silicon Alley, metonymous for New York's broad-spectrum high technology sphere, continues to expand. The Port of New York and New Jersey is also a major economic engine, handling record cargo volume in the first half of . In February , New York City's unemployment rate fell to .%, the lowest in the city's recorded history, with the city achieving the status of what many economists refer to as full employment.

Many Fortune  corporations are headquartered in New York City, as are a large number of multinational corporations. One out of ten private sector jobs in the city is with a foreign company. New York City has been ranked first among cities across the globe in attracting capital, business, and tourists. This ability to attract foreign investment helped New York City top the FDi Magazine American Cities of the Future ranking for .

Real estate is a major force in the city's economy, as the total value of all New York City property was assessed at US$. trillion for the  fiscal year, an increase of .% from the previous year with % of the increase coming from market effects. The Time Warner Center is the property with the highest-listed market value in the city, at US$. billion in . New York City is home to some of the nation's—and the world's—most valuable real estate.  Park Avenue was sold on July ,  for US$ million, about $, per square foot ($,/m²), breaking the barely month-old record for an American office building of $, per square foot ($,/m²) set in the June  sale of  Madison Avenue. According to Forbes, in , Manhattan was home to six of the top ten zip codes in the United States by median housing price. Fifth Avenue in Midtown Manhattan commands the highest retail rents in the world, at US$, per square foot ($,/m) in .

As of , the global advertising agencies of Omnicom Group and Interpublic Group, both based in Manhattan, had combined annual revenues of approximately US$ billion, reflecting New York City's role as the top global center for the advertising industry, which is metonymously referred to as "Madison Avenue". The city's fashion industry provides approximately , employees with $ billion in annual wages.

Other important sectors include medical research and technology, non-profit institutions, and universities. Manufacturing accounts for a significant but declining share of employment, although the city's garment industry is showing a resurgence in Brooklyn. Food processing is a US$ billion industry that employs more than , residents.

Chocolate is New York City's leading specialty-food export, with up to US$ million worth of exports each year. Entrepreneurs were forming a "Chocolate District" in Brooklyn as of , while Godiva, one of the world's largest chocolatiers, continues to be headquartered in Manhattan.

Wall Street
Main article: Wall Street
A large flag is stretched over Roman style columns on the front of a large building.
The New York Stock Exchange on Wall Street, the world's largest stock exchange per total market capitalization of its listed companies.
New York City's most important economic sector lies in its role as the headquarters for the U.S.financial industry, metonymously known as Wall Street. The city's securities industry, enumerating , jobs in August , continues to form the largest segment of the city's financial sector and an important economic engine, accounting in  for  percent of the city's private sector jobs, . percent (US$. billion) of its tax revenue, and  percent of the city's total wages, including an average salary of US$,. Many large financial companies are headquartered in New York City, and the city is also home to a burgeoning number of financial startup companies.

Lower Manhattan is the third-largest central business district in the United States and is home to the New York Stock Exchange, on Wall Street, and the NASDAQ, at  Broadway, representing the world's largest and second largest stock exchanges, respectively, when measured both by overall average daily trading volume and by total market capitalization of their listed companies in . Investment banking fees on Wall Street totaled approximately $ billion in , while in , senior New York City bank officers who manage risk and compliance functions earned as much as $, annually. In fiscal year –, Wall Street's securities industry generated % of New York State's tax revenue. New York City remains the largest global center for trading in public equity and debt capital markets, driven in part by the size and financial development of the U.S. economy.:– In July , NYSE Euronext, the operator of the New York Stock Exchange, took over the administration of the London interbank offered rate from the British Bankers Association. New York also leads in hedge fund management; private equity; and the monetary volume of mergers and acquisitions. Several investment banks and investment mangers headquartered in Manhattan are important participants in other global financial centers.:– New York is also the principal commercial banking center of the United States.

Many of the world's largest media conglomerates are also based in the city. Manhattan contained over  million square feet (. million m) of office space in , making it the largest office market in the United States, while Midtown Manhattan, with nearly  million square feet (. million m) in , is the largest central business district in the world.

Silicon Alley
Main article: Silicon Alley
Further information: Tech companies in New York City and Biotech companies in New York City

Silicon Alley, once centered around the Flatiron District, is now metonymous for New York's high tech sector, which has since expanded beyond the area.
Silicon Alley, centered in Manhattan, has evolved into a metonym for the sphere encompassing the New York City metropolitan region's high technology industries involving the Internet, new media, telecommunications, digital media, software development, biotechnology, game design, financial technology ("FinTech"), and other fields within information technology that are supported by its entrepreneurship ecosystem and venture capital investments. In , Silicon Alley generated over US$. billion in venture capital investment across a broad spectrum of high technology enterprises, most based in Manhattan, with others in Brooklyn, Queens, and elsewhere in the region. High technology startup companies and employment are growing in New York City and the region, bolstered by the city's position in North America as the leading Internet hub and telecommunications center, including its vicinity to several transatlantic fiber optic trunk lines, New York's intellectual capital, and its extensive outdoor wireless connectivity. Verizon Communications, headquartered at  West Street in Lower Manhattan, was at the final stages in  of completing a US$ billion fiberoptic telecommunications upgrade throughout New York City. As of , New York City hosted , employees in the tech sector.

The biotechnology sector is also growing in New York City, based upon the city's strength in academic scientific research and public and commercial financial support. On December , , then Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg announced his choice of Cornell University and Technion-Israel Institute of Technology to build a US$ billion graduate school of applied sciences called Cornell Tech on Roosevelt Island with the goal of transforming New York City into the world's premier technology capital. By mid-, Accelerator, a biotech investment firm, had raised more than US$ million from investors, including Eli Lilly and Company, Pfizer, and Johnson & Johnson, for initial funding to create biotechnology startups at the Alexandria Center for Life Science, which encompasses more than , square feet (, m) on East th Street and promotes collaboration among scientists and entrepreneurs at the center and with nearby academic, medical, and research institutions. The New York City Economic Development Corporation's Early Stage Life Sciences Funding Initiative and venture capital partners, including Celgene, General Electric Ventures, and Eli Lilly, committed a minimum of US$ million to help launch  to  ventures in life sciences and biotechnology.

Tourism
Main article: Tourism in New York City

Times Square is the hub of the Broadway theater district and a media center. It also has one of the highest annual attendance rates of any tourist attraction in the world, estimated at  million.

The I Love New York logo, designed by Milton Glaser in 
Tourism is a vital industry for New York City, which has witnessed a growing combined volume of international and domestic tourists, receiving a seventh consecutive annual record of approximately  million visitors in . Tourism had generated an all-time high US$. billion in overall economic impact for New York City in , pending  statistics. Approximately  million visitors to New York City were from outside the United States, with the highest numbers from the United Kingdom, Canada, Brazil, and China. According to the website reuters.com, "New York City tourism climb[ed] record high in  for [the] sixth year.".

I Love New York (stylized I ❤ NY) is both a logo and a song that are the basis of an advertising campaign and have been used since  to promote tourism in New York City, and later to promote New York State as well. The trademarked logo, owned by New York State Empire State Development, appears in souvenir shops and brochures throughout the city and state, some licensed, many not. The song is the state song of New York.

Major tourist destinations include Times Square; Broadway theater productions; the Empire State Building; the Statue of Liberty; Ellis Island; the United Nations Headquarters; museums such as the Metropolitan Museum of Art; greenspaces such as Central Park and Washington Square Park; Rockefeller Center; the Manhattan Chinatown; luxury shopping along Fifth and Madison Avenues; and events such as the Halloween Parade in Greenwich Village; the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade; the lighting of the Rockefeller Center Christmas Tree; the St. Patrick's Day parade; seasonal activities such as ice skating in Central Park in the wintertime; the Tribeca Film Festival; and free performances in Central Park at Summerstage. Major attractions in the boroughs outside Manhattan include Flushing Meadows-Corona Park and the Unisphere in Queens; the Bronx Zoo; Coney Island, Brooklyn; and the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx. The New York Wheel, a -foot ferris wheel, was under construction at the northern shore of Staten Island in , overlooking the Statue of Liberty, New York Harbor, and the Lower Manhattan skyline.

Manhattan was on track to have an estimated , hotel rooms at the end of , a % increase from . In October , the Anbang Insurance Group, based in China, purchased the Waldorf Astoria New York for US$. billion, making it the world's most expensive hotel ever sold.

Media and entertainment
Main article: Media in New York City
Ice skaters on a rink below a golden sculpture and a row of national flags that fly in front of a stone tower.
Rockefeller Center is home to NBC Studios.
New York is a prominent location for the American entertainment industry, with many films, television series, books, and other media being set there. As of , New York City was the second largest center for filmmaking and television production in the United States, producing about  feature films annually, employing , individuals; the filmed entertainment industry has been growing in New York, contributing nearly US$ billion to the New York City economy alone as of , and by volume, New York is the world leader in independent film production – one-third of all American independent films are produced in New York City. The Association of Independent Commercial Producers is also based in New York. In the first five months of  alone, location filming for television pilots in New York City exceeded the record production levels for all of , with New York surpassing Los Angeles as the top North American city for the same distinction during the / cycle.

New York City is additionally a center for the advertising, music, newspaper, digital media, and publishing industries and is also the largest media market in North America. Some of the city's media conglomerates and institutions include Time Warner, the Thomson Reuters Corporation, the Associated Press, Bloomberg L.P., the News Corporation, The New York Times Company, NBCUniversal, the Hearst Corporation, AOL, and Viacom. Seven of the world's top eight global advertising agency networks have their headquarters in New York. Two of the top three record labels' headquarters are in New York: Sony Music Entertainment and Warner Music Group. Universal Music Group also has offices in New York. New media enterprises are contributing an increasingly important component to the city's central role in the media sphere.

More than  newspapers and  consumer magazines have an office in the city, and the publishing industry employs about , people. Two of the three national daily newspapers in the United States are New York papers: The Wall Street Journal and The New York Times, which has won the most Pulitzer Prizes for journalism. Major tabloid newspapers in the city include: The New York Daily News, which was founded in  by Joseph Medill Patterson and The New York Post, founded in  by Alexander Hamilton. The city also has a comprehensive ethnic press, with  newspapers and magazines published in more than  languages. El Diario La Prensa is New York's largest Spanish-language daily and the oldest in the nation. The New York Amsterdam News, published in Harlem, is a prominent African American newspaper. The Village Voice is the largest alternative newspaper.

The television industry developed in New York and is a significant employer in the city's economy. The three major American broadcast networks are all headquartered in New York: ABC, CBS, and NBC. Many cable networks are based in the city as well, including MTV, Fox News, HBO, Showtime, Bravo, Food Network, AMC, and Comedy Central. The City of New York operates a public broadcast service, NYCTV, that has produced several original Emmy Award-winning shows covering music and culture in city neighborhoods and city government.

New York is also a major center for non-commercial educational media. The oldest public-access television channel in the United States is the Manhattan Neighborhood Network, founded in . WNET is the city's major public television station and a primary source of national Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) television programming. WNYC, a public radio station owned by the city until , has the largest public radio audience in the United States.

Human resources
Education and scholarly activity
Main article: Education in New York City
Primary and secondary education
The New York City Public Schools system, managed by the New York City Department of Education, is the largest public school system in the United States, serving about . million students in more than , separate primary and secondary schools. The city's public school system includes nine specialized high schools to serve academically and artistically gifted students. The city government pays the Pelham Public Schools to educate a very small, detached section of the Bronx.


Butler Library at Columbia University, described as one of the most beautiful college libraries in the United States.

The Washington Square Arch, an unofficial icon of both New York University (NYU) and its Greenwich Village neighborhood.
The New York City Charter School Center assists the setup of new charter schools. There are approximately  additional privately run secular and religious schools in the city.

Higher education and research
Over , students are enrolled in New York City's over  higher education institutions, the highest number of any city in the United States, including over half million in the City University of New York (CUNY) system alone in . In , three out of five Manhattan residents were college graduates, and one out of four had a postgraduate degree, forming one of the highest concentrations of highly educated people in any American city. New York City is home to such notable private universities as Barnard College, Columbia University, Cooper Union, Fordham University, New York University, New York Institute of Technology, Pace University, and Yeshiva University. The public CUNY system is one of the largest universities in the nation, comprising  institutions across all five boroughs: senior colleges, community colleges, and other graduate/professional schools. The public State University of New York (SUNY) system serves New York City, as well as the rest of the state. The city also has other smaller private colleges and universities, including many religious and special-purpose institutions, such as St. John's University, The Juilliard School, Manhattan College, The College of Mount Saint Vincent, Fashion Institute of Technology, Parsons School of Design, The New School, Pratt Institute, The School of Visual Arts, The King's College, and Wagner College.

Much of the scientific research in the city is done in medicine and the life sciences. New York City has the most post-graduate life sciences degrees awarded annually in the United States, with  Nobel laureates having roots in local institutions as of ; while in , , licensed physicians were practicing in New York City. Major biomedical research institutions include Memorial Sloan–Kettering Cancer Center, Rockefeller University, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, and Weill Cornell Medical College, being joined by the Cornell University/Technion-Israel Institute of Technology venture on Roosevelt Island. The graduates of SUNY Maritime College in the Bronx earned the highest average annual salary of any university graduates in the United States, US$, as of .

Public library system

The Stephen A. Schwarzman Headquarters Building of the New York Public Library, at th Avenue and nd Street.
The New York Public Library, which has the largest collection of any public library system in the United States, serves Manhattan, the Bronx, and Staten Island. Queens is served by the Queens Borough Public Library, the nation's second largest public library system, while the Brooklyn Public Library serves Brooklyn.

Public health
Main article: New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation

New York-Presbyterian Hospital, white complex at center, the largest hospital and largest private employer in New York City and one of the world's busiest.
The New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation (HHC) operates the public hospitals and clinics in New York City. A public benefit corporation with $. billion in annual revenues, HHC is the largest municipal healthcare system in the United States serving . million patients, including more than , uninsured city residents. HHC was created in  by the New York State Legislature as a public benefit corporation (Chapter  of the Laws ). HHC operates  acute care hospitals, five nursing homes, six diagnostic and treatment centers, and more than  community-based primary care sites, serving primarily the poor and working class. HHC's MetroPlus Health Plan is one of the New York area's largest providers of government-sponsored health insurance and is the plan of choice for nearly half million New Yorkers.

HHC's facilities annually provide millions of New Yorkers services interpreted in more than  languages. The most well-known hospital in the HHC system is Bellevue Hospital, the oldest public hospital in the United States. Bellevue is the designated hospital for treatment of the President of the United States and other world leaders if they become sick or injured while in New York City. The president of HHC is Ramanathan Raju, MD, a surgeon and former CEO of the Cook County health system in Illinois.

Public safety
Police and law enforcement
Main articles: New York Police Department and Law enforcement in New York City
Further information: Crime in New York City

The New York City Police Department (NYPD) represents the largest police force in the United States.
The New York City Police Department (NYPD) has been the largest police force in the United States by a significant margin, with over , sworn officers. Members of the NYPD are frequently referred to by politicians, the media, and their own police cars by the nickname, New York's Finest.

In , the NYPD came under scrutiny for its use of a stop-and-frisk program, which has undergone several policy revisions since then. In , New York City had the third lowest murder rate among the largest U.S. cities, having become significantly safer after a spike in crime in the s through s. Violent crime in New York City decreased more than % from  to , and continued decreasing during periods when the nation as a whole saw increases. By , New York City's crime rate was similar to that of Provo, Utah, and was ranked th in crime among the  U.S. cities with populations greater than ,. In , the homicide rate was at its lowest level since , and in , the city recorded fewer than  homicides for the first time ever since crime statistics were first published in . In , .% of New York City misdemeanor assault suspects were black, .% Hispanic, .% white, .% Asian/Pacific Islander and .% Native American. New York City experienced  homicides in , its second lowest number on record.

Sociologists and criminologists have not reached consensus on the explanation for the dramatic decrease in the city's crime rate. Some attribute the phenomenon to new tactics used by the NYPD, including its use of CompStat and the broken windows theory. Others cite the end of the crack epidemic and demographic changes, including from immigration. Another theory is that widespread exposure to lead pollution from automobile exhaust, which can lower intelligence and increase aggression levels, incited the initial crime wave in the mid-th century, most acutely affecting heavily trafficked cities like New York. A strong correlation was found demonstrating that violent crime rates in New York and other big cities began to fall after lead was removed from American gasoline in the s. Another theory cited to explain New York City's falling homicide rate is the inverse correlation between the number of murders and the increasingly wetter climate in the city.

Organized crime has long been associated with New York City, beginning with the Forty Thieves and the Roach Guards in the Five Points in the s. The th century saw a rise in the Mafia, dominated by the Five Families, as well as in gangs, including the Black Spades. The Mafia and gang presence has declined in the city in the st century.

Firefighting
Main article: New York City Fire Department

The New York City Fire Department (FDNY) is the largest municipal fire department in the United States.
The New York City Fire Department (FDNY), provides fire protection, technical rescue, primary response to biological, chemical, and radioactive hazards, and emergency medical services for the five boroughs of New York City. The New York City Fire Department is the largest municipal fire department in the United States and the second largest in the world after the Tokyo Fire Department. The FDNY employs approximately , uniformed firefighters and over , uniformed EMTs and paramedics. The FDNY's motto is New York's Bravest.

The New York City Fire Department faces highly multifaceted firefighting challenges in many ways unique to New York. In addition to responding to building types that range from wood-frame single family homes to high-rise structures, there are many secluded bridges and tunnels, as well as large parks and wooded areas that can give rise to brush fires. New York is also home to one of the largest subway systems in the world, consisting of hundreds of miles of tunnel with electrified track.

The FDNY headquarters is located at  MetroTech Center in Downtown Brooklyn, and the FDNY Fire Academy is located on Randalls Island. There are three Bureau of Fire Communications alarm offices which receive and dispatch alarms to appropriate units. One office, at  Metrotech Center in Brooklyn, houses Manhattan/Citywide, Brooklyn, and Staten Island Fire Communications. The Bronx and Queens offices are in separate buildings.

Culture and contemporary life
Further information: Culture of New York City and List of people from New York City
New York City has been described as the cultural capital of the world by the diplomatic consulates of Iceland and Latvia and by New York's Baruch College. A book containing a series of essays titled New York, Culture Capital of the World, – has also been published as showcased by the National Library of Australia. In describing New York, author Tom Wolfe said, "Culture just seems to be in the air, like part of the weather."

Numerous major American cultural movements began in the city, such as the Harlem Renaissance, which established the African-American literary canon in the United States. The city was a center of jazz in the s, abstract expressionism in the s, and the birthplace of hip hop in the s. The city's punk and hardcore scenes were influential in the s and s. New York has long had a flourishing scene for Jewish American literature.

The city is the birthplace of many cultural movements, including the Harlem Renaissance in literature and visual art; abstract expressionism (also known as the New York School) in painting; and hip hop, punk, salsa, disco, freestyle, Tin Pan Alley, and jazz in music. New York City has been considered the dance capital of the world. The city is also frequently the setting for novels, movies (see List of films set in New York City), and television programs. New York Fashion Week is one of the world's preeminent fashion events and is afforded extensive coverage by the media. New York has also frequently been ranked the top fashion capital of the world on the annual list compiled by the Global Language Monitor.

Arts
New York City has more than , arts and cultural organizations and more than  art galleries of all sizes. The city government funds the arts with a larger annual budget than the National Endowment for the Arts. Wealthy business magnates in the th century built a network of major cultural institutions, such as the famed Carnegie Hall and the Metropolitan Museum of Art, that would become internationally established. The advent of electric lighting led to elaborate theater productions, and in the s, New York City theaters on Broadway and along nd Street began featuring a new stage form that became known as the Broadway musical. Strongly influenced by the city's immigrants, productions such as those of Harrigan and Hart, George M. Cohan, and others used song in narratives that often reflected themes of hope and ambition.

Performing arts
Main articles: Broadway theatre and Music of New York City
The corner of a lit up plaza with a fountain in the center and the ends of two brightly lit buildings with tall arches on the square.
Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts
Broadway theatre is one of the premier forms of English-language theatre in the world, named after Broadway, the major thoroughfare that crosses Times Square, also sometimes referred to as "The Great White Way". Forty-one venues in Midtown Manhattan's Theatre District, each with at least  seats, are classified as Broadway theatres. According to The Broadway League, Broadway shows sold approximately US$. billion worth of tickets in the – season, an .% increase from US$. billion in the – season. Attendance in – stood at . million, representing a .% increase from the – season's . million.

Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, anchoring Lincoln Square on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, is home to numerous influential arts organizations, including the Metropolitan Opera, New York City Opera, New York Philharmonic, and New York City Ballet, as well as the Vivian Beaumont Theater, the Juilliard School, Jazz at Lincoln Center, and Alice Tully Hall. The Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute is in Union Square, and Tisch School of the Arts is based at New York University, while Central Park SummerStage presents free music concerts in Central Park.

A very ornate multi-story stone façade rises over steps and a plaza at night.
The Metropolitan Museum of Art, part of Museum Mile, is one of the largest museums in the world.
In April , New York hosted the annual Cardistry-Con, a three-day cardistry convention and interactive conference for cardists all over the world.

Visual arts
Main article: List of museums and cultural institutions in New York City
New York City is home to hundreds of cultural institutions and historic sites, many of which are internationally known. Museum Mile is the name for a section of Fifth Avenue running from nd to th streets on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, in an area sometimes called Upper Carnegie Hill. The Mile, which contains one of the densest displays of culture in the world, is actually three blocks longer than one mile (. km). Ten museums occupy the length of this section of Fifth Avenue. The tenth museum, the Museum for African Art, joined the ensemble in , although its museum at th Street, the first new museum constructed on the Mile since the Guggenheim in , opened in late . In addition to other programming, the museums collaborate for the annual Museum Mile Festival, held each year in June, to promote the museums and increase visitation. Many of the world's most lucrative art auctions are held in New York City.

Cuisine
Main article: Cuisine of New York City
People crowd around white tents in the foreground next to a red brick wall with arched windows. Above and to the left is a towering stone bride.
Smorgasburg opened in  as an open-air food market and is part of the Brooklyn Flea.
New York City's food culture includes a variety of international cuisines influenced by the city's immigrant history. Central European and Italian immigrants brought bagels, cheesecake, and New York-style pizza into the city, while Chinese and other Asian restaurants, sandwich joints, trattorias, diners, and coffeehouses have become ubiquitous. Some , mobile food vendors licensed by the city, many immigrant-owned, have made Middle Eastern foods such as falafel and kebabs examples of modern New York street food. The city is home to "nearly one thousand of the finest and most diverse haute cuisine restaurants in the world", according to Michelin. The New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene assigns letter grades to the city's , restaurants based upon their inspection results.

Clockwise, from upper left: the annual Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade, the world's largest parade; the annual Halloween Parade in Greenwich Village; the annual Philippine Independence Day Parade; and the ticker-tape parade for the Apollo  astronauts
Parades
New York City is well known for its street parades, which celebrate a broad array of themes, including holidays, nationalities, human rights, and major league sports team championship victories. The majority of parades are held in Manhattan. The primary orientation of the annual street parades is typically from north to south, marching along major avenues. The annual Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade is the world's largest parade, beginning alongside Central Park and processing southward to the flagship Macy's Herald Square store; the parade is viewed on telecasts worldwide and draws millions of spectators in person. Other notable parades including the annual St. Patrick's Day Parade in March, the LGBT Pride March in June, the Greenwich Village Halloween Parade in October, and numerous parades commemorating the independence days of many nations. Ticker-tape parades celebrating championships won by sports teams as well as other heroic accomplishments march northward along the Canyon of Heroes on Broadway from Bowling Green to City Hall Park in Lower Manhattan.

Accent and dialect
Main article: New York City English
The New York area is home to a distinctive regional speech pattern called the New York dialect, alternatively known as Brooklynese or New Yorkese. It has generally been considered one of the most recognizable accents within American English. The classic version of this dialect is centered on middle and working-class people of European descent. The influx of non-European immigrants in recent decades has led to changes in this distinctive dialect, and the traditional form of this speech pattern is no longer as prevalent among general New Yorkers as in the past.

The traditional New York area accent is characterized as non-rhotic, so that the sound [ɹ] does not appear at the end of a syllable or immediately before a consonant; hence the pronunciation of the city name as "New Yawk." There is no [ɹ] in words like park [pɑək] or [pɒək] (with vowel backed and diphthongized due to the low-back chain shift), butter [bʌɾə], or here [hiə]. In another feature called the low back chain shift, the [ɔ] vowel sound of words like talk, law, cross, chocolate, and coffee and the often homophonous [ɔr] in core and more are tensed and usually raised more than in General American. In the most old-fashioned and extreme versions of the New York dialect, the vowel sounds of words like "girl" and of words like "oil" became a diphthong [ɜɪ]. This would often be misperceived by speakers of other accents as a reversal of the er and oy sounds, so that girl is pronounced "goil" and oil is pronounced "erl"; this leads to the caricature of New Yorkers saying things like "Joizey" (Jersey), "Toidy-Toid Street" (rd St.) and "terlet" (toilet). The character Archie Bunker from the s sitcom All in the Family (played by Carroll O'Connor) was an example of having used this pattern of speech, which continues to fade in its overall presence.

Sports
Three runners in a race down a street where onlookers are cheering behind barriers.
The New York Marathon is the largest marathon in the world.
A tennis stadium pack with fans watching a grass court.
The US Open Tennis Championships are held every August and September in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
A baseball stadium from behind home plate in the evening.
Citi Field, also in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, has been home to the New York Mets since .
Main article: Sports in New York City
New York City is home to the headquarters of the National Football League, Major League Baseball, the National Basketball Association, the National Hockey League, and Major League Soccer. The New York metropolitan area hosts the most sports teams in these five professional leagues. Participation in professional sports in the city predates all professional leagues, and the city has been continuously hosting professional sports since the birth of the Brooklyn Dodgers in . The city has played host to over forty major professional teams in the five sports and their respective competing leagues, both current and historic. Four of the ten most expensive stadiums ever built worldwide (MetLife Stadium, the new Yankee Stadium, Madison Square Garden, and Citi Field) are located in the New York metropolitan area. Madison Square Garden, its predecessor, the original Yankee Stadium and Ebbets Field, are sporting venues located in New York City, the latter two having been commemorated on U.S. postage stamps.

New York has been described as the "Capital of Baseball". There have been  Major League Baseball World Series and  pennants won by New York teams. It is one of only five metro areas (Los Angeles, Chicago, Baltimore–Washington, and the San Francisco Bay Area being the others) to have two baseball teams. Additionally, there have been  World Series in which two New York City teams played each other, known as a Subway Series and occurring most recently in . No other metropolitan area has had this happen more than once (Chicago in , St. Louis in , and the San Francisco Bay Area in ). The city's two current Major League Baseball teams are the New York Mets, who play at Citi Field in Queens, and the New York Yankees, who play at Yankee Stadium in the Bronx. who compete in six games of interleague play every regular season that has also come to be called the Subway Series. The Yankees have won a record  championships, while the Mets have won the World Series twice. The city also was once home to the Brooklyn Dodgers (now the Los Angeles Dodgers), who won the World Series once, and the New York Giants (now the San Francisco Giants), who won the World Series five times. Both teams moved to California in . There are also two Minor League Baseball teams in the city, the Brooklyn Cyclones and Staten Island Yankees.

The city is represented in the National Football League by the New York Giants and the New York Jets, although both teams play their home games at MetLife Stadium in nearby East Rutherford, New Jersey, which hosted Super Bowl XLVIII in .

The New York Islanders and the New York Rangers represent the city in the National Hockey League. Also within the metropolitan area are the New Jersey Devils, who play in nearby Newark, New Jersey.

The city's National Basketball Association teams are the Brooklyn Nets and the New York Knicks, while the New York Liberty is the city's Women's National Basketball Association. The first national college-level basketball championship, the National Invitation Tournament, was held in New York in  and remains in the city. The city is well known for its links to basketball, which is played in nearly every park in the city by local youth, many of whom have gone on to play for major college programs and in the NBA.

In soccer, New York City is represented by New York City FC of Major League Soccer, who play their home games at Yankee Stadium. The New York Red Bulls play their home games at Red Bull Arena in nearby Harrison, New Jersey. Historically, the city is known for the New York Cosmos, the highly successful former professional soccer team which was the American home of Pelé. A new version of the New York Cosmos was formed in , and began play in the second division North American Soccer League in . The Cosmos play their home games at James M. Shuart Stadium on the campus of Hofstra University, just outside the New York City limits in Hempstead, New York.

The annual United States Open Tennis Championships is one of the world's four Grand Slam tennis tournaments and is held at the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens. The New York City Marathon, which courses through all five boroughs, is the world's largest running marathon, with , finishers in  and , applicants for the  race. The Millrose Games is an annual track and field meet whose featured event is the Wanamaker Mile. Boxing is also a prominent part of the city's sporting scene, with events like the Amateur Boxing Golden Gloves being held at Madison Square Garden each year. The city is also considered the host of the Belmont Stakes, the last, longest and oldest of horse racing's Triple Crown races, held just over the city's border at Belmont Park on the first or second Sunday of June. The city also hosted the  U.S. Open golf tournament and the  and  PGA Championships, and has been host city for both events several times, most notably for nearby Winged Foot Golf Club. The Gaelic games are played in Riverdale, Bronx at Gaelic Park, home to the New York GAA, the only North American team to compete at the senior inter-county level.

Transportation
A row of yellow taxis in front of a multi-story ornate stone building with three huge arched windows.
New York City is home to the two busiest rail stations in the US, including Grand Central Terminal.
Main article: Transportation in New York City
New York City's comprehensive transportation system is both complex and extensive.

Rapid transit
Main article: Mass transit in New York City
Mass transit in New York City, most of which runs  hours a day, accounts for one in every three users of mass transit in the United States, and two-thirds of the nation's rail riders live in the New York City Metropolitan Area.

Rail
The back end of a subway train, with a red E on a LED display on the top. To the left of the train is a platform with a person walking away.
The New York City Subway is the world's largest rapid transit system by length of routes and by number of stations.
The iconic New York City Subway system is the largest rapid transit system in the world when measured by stations in operation, with , and by length of routes. Nearly all of New York's subway system is open  hours a day, in contrast to the overnight shutdown common to systems in most cities, including Hong Kong, London, Paris, Seoul, and Tokyo. The New York City Subway is also the busiest metropolitan rail transit system in the Western Hemisphere, with . billion passenger rides in , while Grand Central Terminal, also referred to as "Grand Central Station", is the world's largest railway station by number of train platforms.

Public transport is essential in New York City. .% of New Yorkers commuted to work in  using mass transit. This is in contrast to the rest of the United States, where about % of commuters drive automobiles to their workplace. According to the New York City Comptroller, workers in the New York City area spend an average of  hours and  minutes getting to work each week, the longest commute time in the nation among large cities. New York is the only US city in which a majority (%) of households do not have a car; only % of Manhattanites own a car. Due to their high usage of mass transit, New Yorkers spend less of their household income on transportation than the national average, saving $ billion annually on transportation compared to other urban Americans.

New York City's commuter rail network is the largest in North America. The rail network, connecting New York City to its suburbs, consists of the Long Island Rail Road, Metro-North Railroad, and New Jersey Transit. The combined systems converge at Grand Central Terminal and Pennsylvania Station and contain more than  stations and  rail lines. In Queens, the elevated AirTrain people mover system connects JFK International Airport to the New York City Subway and the Long Island Rail Road; a separate AirTrain system is planned alongside the Grand Central Parkway to connect LaGuardia Airport to these transit systems. For intercity rail, New York City is served by Amtrak, whose busiest station by a significant margin is Pennsylvania Station on the West Side of Manhattan, from which Amtrak provides connections to Boston, Philadelphia, and Washington, D.C. along the Northeast Corridor, and long-distance train service to other North American cities.

The Staten Island Railway rapid transit system solely serves Staten Island, operating  hours a day. The Port Authority Trans-Hudson (PATH train) links Midtown and Lower Manhattan to northeastern New Jersey, primarily Hoboken, Jersey City, and Newark. Like the New York City Subway, the PATH operates  hours a day; meaning three of the six rapid transit systems in the world which operate on -hour schedules are wholly or partly in New York (the others are a portion of the Chicago 'L', the PATCO Speedline serving Philadelphia, and the Copenhagen Metro).

Multibillion-dollar heavy rail transit projects under construction in New York City include the Second Avenue Subway, the East Side Access project, and the  Subway Extension.

Buses

The Port Authority Bus Terminal, the world's busiest bus station, at th Avenue and nd Street.
New York City's public bus fleet is the largest in North America, and the Port Authority Bus Terminal, the main intercity bus terminal of the city, serves , buses and , commuters daily, making it the busiest bus station in the world.

Air
Five jumbo airplanes wait in a line on a runway next to a small body of water. Behind them in the distance is the airport and control tower.
John F. Kennedy Airport in Queens, the busiest international air passenger gateway to the United States.
New York's airspace is the busiest in the United States and one of the world's busiest air transportation corridors. The three busiest airports in the New York metropolitan area include John F. Kennedy International Airport, Newark Liberty International Airport, and LaGuardia Airport; . million travelers used these three airports in , and the city's airspace is the busiest in the nation. JFK and Newark Liberty were the busiest and fourth busiest U.S. gateways for international air passengers, respectively, in ; as of , JFK was the busiest airport for international passengers in North America. Plans have advanced to expand passenger volume at a fourth airport, Stewart International Airport near Newburgh, New York, by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. Plans were announced in July  to entirely rebuild LaGuardia Airport in a multibillion-dollar project to replace its aging facilities. Other commercial airports in or serving the New York metropolitan area include Long Island MacArthur Airport, Trenton–Mercer Airport and Westchester County Airport. The primary general aviation airport serving the area is Teterboro Airport.

Ferries

The Staten Island Ferry shuttles commuters between Manhattan and Staten Island.
The Staten Island Ferry is the world's busiest ferry route, carrying over  million passengers from July  through June  on the .-mile (. km) route between Staten Island and Lower Manhattan and running  hours a day. Other ferry systems shuttle commuters between Manhattan and other locales within the city and the metropolitan area.

Citywide Ferry Service, a NYCEDC initiative with routes that are proposed to travel to all five boroughs, was launched in , with second graders choosing the names of the ferries. Meanwhile, Seastreak ferry announced construction of a -passenger high-speed luxury ferry in September , to shuttle riders between the Jersey Shore and Manhattan, anticipated to start service in ; this would be the largest vessel in its class.

Taxis, transport startups, and trams
Other features of the city's transportation infrastructure encompass more than , yellow taxicabs; various competing startup transportation network companies; and an aerial tramway that transports commuters between Roosevelt Island and Manhattan Island. Ride-sharing services have become significant competition for cab drivers in New York.

Streets and highways

th Avenue, looking northward ("uptown"). Most streets and avenues in Manhattan's grid plan incorporate a one-way traffic configuration.
Despite New York's heavy reliance on its vast public transit system, streets are a defining feature of the city. Manhattan's street grid plan greatly influenced the city's physical development. Several of the city's streets and avenues, like Broadway, Wall Street, Madison Avenue, and Seventh Avenue are also used as metonyms for national industries there: the theater, finance, advertising, and fashion organizations, respectively.

New York City also has an extensive web of expressways and parkways, which link the city's boroughs to each other and to northern New Jersey, Westchester County, Long Island, and southwestern Connecticut through various bridges and tunnels. Because these highways serve millions of outer borough and suburban residents who commute into Manhattan, it is quite common for motorists to be stranded for hours in traffic jams that are a daily occurrence, particularly during rush hour.

River crossings
A tall suspension bridge connects a distant piece of land at night.
The Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, one of the world's longest suspension bridges, connects Brooklyn and Staten Island across The Narrows.

The George Washington Bridge, connecting Upper Manhattan (background) from Fort Lee, New Jersey across the Hudson River, is the world's busiest motor vehicle bridge.
New York City is located on one of the world's largest natural harbors, and the boroughs of Manhattan and Staten Island are (primarily) coterminous with islands of the same names, while Queens and Brooklyn are located at the west end of the larger Long Island, and The Bronx is located at the southern tip of New York State's mainland. This situation of boroughs separated by water led to the development of an extensive infrastructure of well-known bridges and tunnels.

The George Washington Bridge is the world's busiest motor vehicle bridge, connecting Manhattan to Bergen County, New Jersey. The Verrazano-Narrows Bridge is the longest suspension bridge in the Americas and one of the world's longest. The Brooklyn Bridge is an icon of the city itself. The towers of the Brooklyn Bridge are built of limestone, granite, and Rosendale cement, and their architectural style is neo-Gothic, with characteristic pointed arches above the passageways through the stone towers. This bridge was also the longest suspension bridge in the world from its opening until , and is the first steel-wire suspension bridge. The Queensboro Bridge is an important piece of cantilever architecture. The Manhattan Bridge, opened in , is considered to be the forerunner of modern suspension bridges, and its design served as the model for many of the long-span suspension bridges around the world; the Manhattan Bridge, Throgs Neck Bridge, Triborough Bridge, and Verrazano-Narrows Bridge are all examples of Structural Expressionism.

Manhattan Island is linked to New York City's outer boroughs and New Jersey by several tunnels as well. The Lincoln Tunnel, which carries , vehicles a day under the Hudson River between New Jersey and Midtown Manhattan, is the busiest vehicular tunnel in the world. The tunnel was built instead of a bridge to allow unfettered passage of large passenger and cargo ships that sailed through New York Harbor and up the Hudson River to Manhattan's piers. The Holland Tunnel, connecting Lower Manhattan to Jersey City, New Jersey, was the world's first mechanically ventilated vehicular tunnel when it opened in . The Queens-Midtown Tunnel, built to relieve congestion on the bridges connecting Manhattan with Queens and Brooklyn, was the largest non-federal project in its time when it was completed in . President Franklin D. Roosevelt was the first person to drive through it. The Hugh L. Carey Tunnel runs underneath Battery Park and connects the Financial District at the southern tip of Manhattan to Red Hook in Brooklyn.

Environment
Main article: Environmental issues in New York City
Two yellow taxis on a narrow street lined with shops.
As of July , the city had , hybrid taxis in service, the largest number of any city in North America.
Environmental impact reduction
New York City has focused on reducing its environmental impact and carbon footprint. Mass transit use in New York City is the highest in the United States. Also, by , the city had , hybrid taxis and other clean diesel vehicles, representing around % of New York's taxi fleet in service, the most of any city in North America.

New York's high rate of public transit use, over , daily cyclists as of , and many pedestrian commuters make it the most energy-efficient major city in the United States. Walk and bicycle modes of travel account for % of all modes for trips in the city; nationally the rate for metro regions is about %. In both its  and  rankings, Walk Score named New York City the most walkable large city in the United States. Citibank sponsored the introduction of , public bicycles for the city's bike-share project in the summer of . Research conducted by Quinnipiac University showed that a majority of New Yorkers support the initiative. New York City's numerical "in-season cycling indicator" of bicycling in the city hit an all-time high in .

The city government was a petitioner in the landmark Massachusetts v. Environmental Protection Agency Supreme Court case forcing the EPA to regulate greenhouse gases as pollutants. The city is also a leader in the construction of energy-efficient green office buildings, including the Hearst Tower among others. Mayor Bill de Blasio has committed to an % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions between  and  to reduce the city's contributions to climate change, beginning with a comprehensive "Green Buildings" plan.

Water purity and availability
Main articles: Food and water in New York City and New York City water supply system
New York City is supplied with drinking water by the protected Catskill Mountains watershed. As a result of the watershed's integrity and undisturbed natural water filtration system, New York is one of only four major cities in the United States the majority of whose drinking water is pure enough not to require purification by water treatment plants. The Croton Watershed north of the city is undergoing construction of a US$. billion water purification plant to augment New York City's water supply by an estimated  million gallons daily, representing a greater than % addition to the city's current availability of water. The ongoing expansion of New York City Water Tunnel No. , an integral part of the New York City water supply system, is the largest capital construction project in the city's history, with segments serving Manhattan and The Bronx completed, and with segments serving Brooklyn and Queens planned for construction in .

Environmental revitalization
Newtown Creek, a .-mile (-kilometer) a long estuary that forms part of the border between the boroughs of Brooklyn and Queens, has been designated a Superfund site for environmental clean-up and remediation of the waterway's recreational and economic resources for many communities. One of the most heavily used bodies of water in the Port of New York and New Jersey, it had been one of the most contaminated industrial sites in the country, containing years of discarded toxins, an estimated  million US gallons (, m) of spilled oil, including the Greenpoint oil spill, raw sewage from New York City's sewer system, and other accumulation.

Government and politics
Main articles: Government of New York City and Politics of New York City
Government
A wide white building in a colonial style with a cupola in the center.
New York City Hall is the oldest City Hall in the United States that still houses its original governmental functions.
New York City has been a metropolitan municipality with a mayor–council form of government since its consolidation in . The government of New York is more centralized than that of most other U.S. cities. In New York City, the city government is responsible for public education, correctional institutions, public safety, recreational facilities, sanitation, water supply, and welfare services.

The Mayor and council members are elected to four-year terms. The City Council is a unicameral body consisting of  council members whose districts are defined by geographic population boundaries. Each term for the mayor and council members lasts four years and has a three consecutive-term limit, which is reset after a four-year break. The New York City Administrative Code, the New York City Rules, and the City Record are the code of local laws, compilation of regulations, and official journal, respectively.


The New York County Courthouse houses the New York Supreme Court and other offices.
Each borough is coextensive with a judicial district of the state Unified Court System, of which the Criminal Court and the Civil Court are the local courts, while the New York Supreme Court conducts major trials and appeals. Manhattan hosts the First Department of the Supreme Court, Appellate Division while Brooklyn hosts the Second Department. There are also several extrajudicial administrative courts, which are executive agencies and not part of the state Unified Court System.

Uniquely among major American cities, New York is divided between, and is host to the main branches of, two different US district courts: the District Court for the Southern District of New York, whose main courthouse is on Foley Square near City Hall in Manhattan and whose jurisdiction includes Manhattan and the Bronx; and the District Court for the Eastern District of New York, whose main courthouse is in Brooklyn and whose jurisdiction includes Brooklyn, Queens, and Staten Island. The US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit and US Court of International Trade are also based in New York, also on Foley Square in Manhattan.

Politics

Bill de Blasio, the current and th Mayor of New York City
The present mayor is Bill de Blasio, the first Democrat since . elected in  with over % of the vote, who assumed office on January , .

The Democratic Party holds the majority of public offices. As of April , % of registered voters in the city are Democrats and % are Republicans. New York City has not been carried by a Republican in a statewide or presidential election since President Calvin Coolidge won the five boroughs in . In , Democrat Barack Obama became the first presidential candidate of any party to receive more than % of the overall vote in New York City, sweeping all five boroughs. Party platforms center on affordable housing, education, and economic development, and labor politics are of importance in the city.

New York is the most important source of political fundraising in the United States, as four of the top five ZIP codes in the nation for political contributions are in Manhattan. The top ZIP code,  on the Upper East Side, generated the most money for the  presidential campaigns of George W. Bush and John Kerry. The city has a strong imbalance of payments with the national and state governments. It receives  cents in services for every $ it sends to the federal government in taxes (or annually sends $. billion more than it receives back). City residents and businesses also spent an additional $. billion in the – fiscal year to the state of New York than the city received in return.

Notable people
Main article: List of people from New York City
Global outreach
In , the Sister City Program of the City of New York, Inc. was restructured and renamed New York City Global Partners. New York City has expanded its international outreach via this program to a network of cities worldwide, promoting the exchange of ideas and innovation between their citizenry and policymakers, according to the city's website. New York's historic sister cities are denoted below by the year they joined New York City's partnership network.